Acceleration and delay in bilingual, trilingual
and multilingual German-Romance children
Finite verb placement in German
Laia Arnaus Gil and Natascha Muller
Bergische Universitat Wuppertal, Germany

A production test with 91 bilingual, trilingual and multilingual children
(who acquire more than three languages) elicited finite verbs in German. In
comparison with monolinguals, the children were accelerated with respect to
finite verb placement in main clauses. Following Biberauer & Richards (2006),
the EPP feature of T can be satisfied in different ways across languages: If a DP
is necessary, which is the case for adult German, it can either be raised from
Spec,vP to Spec,TP (in which case the finite verb surfaces in non-clause-final
position) or it is pied-piped to Spec,TP. In the latter case, the whole vP is placed
in the specifier of TP, giving rise to V-final patterns. The bilingual, trilingual and
multilingual children prefer Spec-raising to Spec-pied-piping. We argue that
the choice of the means for EPP satisfaction in the German of the multilingual
children is influenced by the respective Romance language (French/Spanish).
Keywords: early trilingualism, German finite verb placement, cross-linguistic
influence

1.

Introduction

Research on simultaneous bilingual children has advanced during the last 40
years. The last 20 years have seen a great number of studies attesting delay effects of early child bilingualism (cf. Muller, 2017, for an overview). Acceleration
effects are still understudied, though. They have cross-linguistic influence as
their source, according to Paradis & Genesee (1996). Acceleration effects exist in
bilingual German/English-Romance children if they acquire determiner realizations in German (Kupisch, 2006) and if they acquire copula realizations in English
(Liceras, Fernandez Fuertes & de la Fuente, 2011). In both studies, the bilingual
children benefit from the acquisition of grammatical properties in the respective
https://doi.org/10.1075/lab.17081.arn | Published online: 13 November 2018
Linguistic Approaches to Bilingualism, 10:4 (2020), 530-558.
issn 1879-9264 | e-issn 1879-9272 (c) John Benjamins Publishing Company

Acceleration and delay in bilingual, trilingual and multilingual German-Romance children 531


other language. In other words, one language has a booster effect on the other
(cf. Gawlitzek-Maiwald & Tracy, 1996, for language mixing). However, Patuto,
Repetto & Muller (2011) ask the question of how it can be the case that crosslinguistic influence is the source of delay and acceleration at the same time, if delay
is observed when the child encounters too complex grammatical analyses, s/he has
a weak language with lesser resources or s/he has difficulty to process grammatical phenomena. It is unlikely that the same basic constellation, that is, different
complexity, unbalanced bilingualism and exceeding processing load leads to acceleration. Patuto et al. (2011) and Muller (2017) conclude that acceleration effects
must be related to the grammatical phenomenon in question.
The following article studies the phenomenon of finite verb placement in
the acquisition of main clauses in German. We will also report on the acquisition of finite verb placement in German subordinate clauses, since subordinate
clauses have been suggested to give rise to semantically vacuous optionality1 (cf.
Biberauer & Richards, 2006). The reason for this assumption resides in the idea
that T's EPP-feature has to be satisfied, but grammar doesn't mind how. Finite verb
placement in adult and more so in child German is thus reminiscent of this kind
of optionality.2 It can be observed that the variation or preferences monolingual
German children exhibit in main clauses differ from those children who acquire
German and (at least) a Romance language simultaneously. If German main and
subordinate clauses are studied, delay and acceleration are both observable in the
same population of bilingual children. If acceleration effects exist in bilingual children, the question is whether this effect is also observable in trilingual children,
i.e. in children who acquire three languages from birth or whether the acquisition
of three languages will result in a similar development as in German monolingual
children (i.e. target-deviant productions of clause-final placement of the finite verb
in main clauses). The main focus of the present article will be the study of finite verb
placement in main clauses in bi-, tri- and multilingual children, in which new data
from an elicited production task conducted with these three groups of children,
who acquire German as one of their L1s, will be presented. Before introducing the
study, we will report on the existent longitudinal studies on finite verb placement
in German main and subordinate clauses in bilingual and trilingual children.
1. Vacuous optionality is the result of two or more operations which can be used in order to
satisfy the same EPP-feature. The respective variants have exactly the same interpretation.
2. Anderssen, Bentzen & Westgaard (2010) have studied several grammatical phenomena
in acquisition which exhibit free variation in the input. The general result is that there is less
variation in children than acquisitionists have thought there to be. It would be interesting to
extend our proposal to the grammatical domains studied by Anderssen et al., like particle verb
constructions in Norwegian, and to the children's input.

532 Laia Arnaus Gil and Natascha Muller

The paper is structured in the following way: Section 2 presents an account for
German finite verb placement within the framework of generative grammar which
allows for variation in the domain of finite verb placement within and across
languages. German will be compared with Romance and other languages in order
to point out the differences and similarities. Section 3 summarizes the results of
previous studies on the acquisition of finite verb placement in German main and
subordinate clauses by monolingual and bilingual children. These results are based
on longitudinal studies. Section 4 presents the cross-sectional study which is the
focus of the present article. The participants, the methodology and the results of
the elicited production task are presented in separated sub-sections. Section 5 is
devoted to the discussion of the results.
2. Finite verb placement in German
German is a V2 language (and OV), i.e. the finite verbs follows the first constituent
of the main clause. Repetto & Muller (2010, p. 167) give some examples of the V2property in bilingual children's German. The name of the child is accompanied by
an indication of the age given in years; months, days.
(1) a.

da parkt der
(Lukas, 2;4,9)
there parks it 
 `It parks there'
b. kaputt is das
(Marta, 2;3,26)

broken is this 
 `This is broken'
c. hey, das hast du
(Aurelio, 3;0,19)

hey this have you 
 `Hey, you have this'

In subordinate clauses, the finite verb occurs clause-finally. Exceptions to verbfinal subordinate clauses exist with some conjunctions like weil `because' and
obwohl `since' (Ich bin in die Oper gegangen, weil jeder war so begeistert `I went
to the opera because everybody was so delighted') and there seems to be even
regional differences in spoken German as well, where the conjunction obwohl
seems acceptable with a V2-order in northern varieties; for more information
about root word order in non-root contexts cf. Freywald (2013). Furthermore,
German exhibits free variation between V2 and V-final orders in exclamatives
(Wie gesprachig er doch ist! `Now, how talkative he is!') and interrogatives (Wen
er wieder anruft? `Who is he calling again'); cf. Truckenbrodt (2013) for more
details. Since the children in the present study acquire a Romance language, apart


Acceleration and delay in bilingual, trilingual and multilingual German-Romance children 533

from German, we will quickly outline the main facts about Romance word order.
Romance languages (French, Spanish, Italian) are non-V2 (and VO), i.e. in main
clauses, the finite verb follows the subject, which often is the first constituent of
the main clause (although in Spanish and Italian, the position of subjects interacts
with information structure). The finite verb also appears adjacent to the subject
in subordinate clauses. In other words, Romance word order in both main and
subordinate clauses reflect the same word order possibilities, namely VO.
Moving on to German subordinate clauses, it has been assumed in the generative literature that subordinate clauses reflect the actual underlying OV-order of
German. Within a parametrized syntax (the Principles & Parameters framework,
Chomsky, 1981), the German VP is ordered OV and the German TP is head-final.
Furthermore, finiteness is argued to be located in C (COMP, Complementizer) in
German since the seminal work by den Besten (1983). In other words, V2 is derived
by V-to-T-(TENSE, formerly INFL, Inflection)-to-C movement. In subordinate
clauses, the finite verb cannot raise as far as C, since C hosts the complementizer.
Therefore, a subordinate clause with the finite verb in clause-final position results.
In Romance, the directionality parameter is set to the value "head-initial" for TP
(and VP). In addition, the finite verb is raised as far as T and only in well-defined
cases, e.g. in a question due to the wh-criterion by Rizzi (1996), the finite verb
raises to C, giving rise to V2-effects of the type ou va-t-il? `Where goes he'. In
sum, the differences between German and Romance finite verb placement in main
and subordinate clauses have been derived as a combination of the directionality
parameter of T and finite verb raising, in particular as a difference between the
directionality and feature make-up of functional categories.
In the vein of the Minimalist Program (Chomsky, 1995), Biberauer & Richards
(2006) seek to eliminate language-specific properties of the computational system,
among them the parametrization of head-directionality. In the ideal case, alternations in word order within one language should go hand in hand with interpretative differences. This follows from two antagonistic economy principles. First, Last
Resort (LR) - paraphrased as "don't do too much" - guarantees that there can
never be two derivations as the output of the same numeration, if the different
outputs do not give rise to interpretive differences. Second, Full Interpretation -
paraphrased as "don't do too little" - guarantees that the numeration contains
only symbols which have an effect on the output. Outputs which have the same
lexical items but exhibit different interpretations are assumed to have different
numerations. Outputs which have the same lexical items but have the same interpretation should not exist, with one exception, the EPP-feature. This feature
is obligatorily present (perhaps due to the fact that every sentence has a subject,
but see Chomsky, 2013, 2015 for a different view). However, languages vary as to
the source of the nominal category ([D] in a head category or a Spec) and its size

534 Laia Arnaus Gil and Natascha Muller

(the [D] category raised with or without head/spec-piedpiping) that values the
EPP feature in T. All that grammar requires is that T's EPP-feature be satisfied
by an element bearing the feature [D]; it doesn't mind how, in other words it is
either a DP or an agreement morpheme with the categorial status of a pronominal
element, VD, depending on the language. A single grammar can therefore contain
truly optional structures, i.e. semantically vacuous optionality.
Let us start with the first type of language which requires a DP-type element
without spec-piedpiping in order to satisfy the EPP-feature in T. French is a
non-null-subject Romance language and requires the subject-DP in Spec,vP to
raise into Spec,TP. Based on Chomsky (1995), Alexiadou & Anagnostopoulou
(1998, p. 499) present the option of Merging an expletive XP in Spec,TP, as in
English there arrived a man, which checks off the EPP-feature in T. If the numeration contains an expletive (French il), this option is more economical than
movement of a DP into Spec,TP.
A sub-type of spec-seeking languages according to Biberauer & Richards
(2006) are languages in which the [D) feature in T can be checked by a [D] category with spec-piedpiping. Biberauer & Richards (2006) present the example
of Afrikaans where both the verb-final and the V2 structure receive embedded
interpretation.
Ek weet dat sy dikwels Chopin gespeel het
I know that she often Chopin played has
b. Ek weet dat sy het dikwels Chopin gespeel

I know that she has often Chopin played
 `I know that she has often played Chopin.'
(2) a.

The sentences in (2) share one interpretation. Biberauer & Richards (2006) assume
for Afrikaans that the EPP-feature in T must be satisfied by an element bearing
the categorial feature [D], which is the closest accessible nominal category in T's
sister domain. Afrikaans exhibits the EPP feature to be checked by a nominal
category which is either a DP raised into an outer Spec,vP, the specifier of TP, or
by a nominal category which piedpipes vP into the specifier of TP. In other words,
there is either Spec-raising or Spec-piedpiping, as shown in structures (3) and (4)
respectively. Structures (3) and (4) ignore how the OVnonfin order is derived. It also
ignores whether auxiliary verbs are moved from v to T or whether they are directly
inserted into T. The important piece of structure is the raising of the DP sy from
Spec,vP into Spec,TP in (3) and piedpiping of the DP from Spec,vP into Spec,TP in
(4). The finite verb surfaces clause-finally with Spec-piedpiping as in (4).

Acceleration and delay in bilingual, trilingual and multilingual German-Romance children 535


(3) Structure of an Afrikaans subordinate clause with V2 order
CP

TP

C
DP

T
vP

T

vP

DP

dat

sy

het

sy

Adv

VP

dikwels

Chopin gespeel


(4) Structure of an Afrikaans subordinate clause with V-final order
CP

C

TP
vP

T
T

tvP

dat sy dikwels het
Chopin
gespeel



Biberauer & Richards (2006) discuss this kind of variation in one language as
a case of true optionality. In sum, French and Afrikaans are both spec-seeking
languages, differing in the size of the [D] category needed for EPP(T)-satisfaction:
DP in the case of French, vP and DP in the case of Afrikaans.
The second type of languages are head-seeking languages like the pro-drop
languages Italian and Spanish. It has been argued that VD (raised via v) can satisfy
the EPP in T in null-subject languages (Alexiadou & Anagnostopoulou, 1998). In
other words, movement of the finite verb to T suffices in rich agreement languages
to satisfy the EPP-feature in T.3 In essence, the verbal agreement affixes in the
pro-drop languages like Italian and Spanish have the same status as the pronouns
3. Alexiadou & Anagnostopoulou (1998, p. 507) argue that Trentino and Fiorentino are nullsubject languages which make use of the Xo Merge option for EPP-satisfaction. (Obligatory)
clitics instantiate this option.

536 Laia Arnaus Gil and Natascha Muller

in French for example (cf. Rizzi, 1982). As a consequence, subjects in null-subject
languages are in an A-position in SV(O) constructions and behave like Clitic Left
Dislocated elements (Alexiadou & Anagnostopulou, 1998, p. 511) with respect to
their distribution, their interpretation and binding properties.
It has been noticed that Italian requires one verb form for all three persons in
the singular of the subjunctive (SUBJ): Ho paura che sia troppo tardi `(I) am afraid
that (it) may be too late'. Cardinaletti (2004, 126) takes the ungrammaticality of the
second-person-singular interpretation in (5a) to mean that tu is a case in which
Italian is non-pro-drop and requires an overt subject, as in (5b):
Crede che [pro sia ricco], ma non lo sono / *non lo sei / non lo e
`(He) thinks that (I / he) amSUBJ / isSUBJ rich, but (I) am not / *(You) are
not / (He) is not.'
 b. Crede che [tu sia ricco]
 `(He) thinks that you areSUBJ rich.'

(5) a.


For pro-drop-languages like Italian, it has recently been argued that the adult
system is undergoing a change since the subject pronouns which have been used
exclusively by the speakers to signal a topic-shift or a contrast are more and more
found in non-contrasting and non-topic-shift contexts (cf. Figure 3 in Sorace,
Serratrice, Filiaci & Baldo, 2009, p. 471). The following passage is indicative of this
"neutral" function of io in adult Italian. The interviewed adults are the parents of
the German-Italian bilingual children of longitudinal studies which are presented
in Muller (2017). They were asked about their experience with multilingualism
at home, at the workplace and privately. The speaker speaks Italian as her mother
tongue. The interaction is spontaneous. The interviewer is a German-Italian bilingual. The pronoun io which neither signals a contrast nor a topic-shift is in bold.
sai queste parole che si somigliano pero non sono - / questo assolutamente ho
sentito che ce l' hanno tutti innanzi anche le persone che coll' italiano sono piu - /
e comunque e vero che mh eh - la durata del soggiorno all' estero conta meno
eh - del fattore psicologico [1perche io mi ricordo che primi anni che bloccai
proprio al massimo coll' italia] / [2io sono stata propiamente piu di un anno
senza avere un minimo contatto con gli italiani / ehm ja - cioe/ [3di avere pensato
molto avere proprio fatto disimparato con camilla io ho parlato in tedesco] / per
cui sicuramente e un fattore psicologico/ [...] e quindi a questo punto ho capito
questo (mmmm)/4
4. During the passage, the speaker talks about her own experiences with her mother tongue
while she resided in Germany, i.e. it is always her opinion which is the topic of conversation. The
first person pronoun is neither used to shift the topic nor is it focalized. In what follows, we will
translate the sentences which contain neutral io: [1because I myself remember that first years
that stop really maximally with Italy], [2I am been virtually more than one year without to-have

Acceleration and delay in bilingual, trilingual and multilingual German-Romance children 537


In the framework of Biberauer & Richards (2006),5 these facts can be accounted for
in the following way: in Italian, apart from VD, EPP(T)-satisfaction can be achieved
by raising the subject-DP in Spec,vP into Spec,TP, as in French. The pronoun tu
could figure as such a DP. The "neutral" function of io in non-subjunctive clauses
could be argued to indicate that, besides tu, io is a possible candidate DP. Future
research on null-subject languages is in order to further substantiate this idea.
As the Afrikaans example clearly shows, there are languages which allow more
than one option to satisfy the EPP(T). According to the typology, German, a nonpro-drop language like French, could be analyzed like Afrikaans as a spec-seeking
language with two options to check the EPP-feature in T, Spec-raising and Specpiedpiping. In German, some conjunctions like weil allow, as in the Afrikaans
case, V2 word order and V-final order in subordinate clauses. Structure (6) would
correspond to a German V2 subordinate clause, structure (7) to a subordinate
clause with the finite verb in clause-final position.
(6) Structure of a German weil-clause with V2 order
CP

TP

C
DP

T
vP

T

vP

DP

weil

sie

hat

sie

Adv

VP

oft

Chopin gespielt



a minimal contact with the italians], [3of to-have thought a-lot to-have really done unlearned
with Camilla I have talked in German].
5. Cardinaletti (2004) proposes to split subjecthood into different functional projections specialized to host different subjects, one of which is SpecEPP. This line of argumentation could also
be pursued in order to describe the different behavior of the formerly strong pronouns tu and
io, which sometimes behave as weak pronouns. It presupposes a split of functional categories,
SubjP, EPPP, AgrSP (and discrete projections realizing different -features). Nominative Case
checking, EPP checking and -feature checking take place in different syntactic positions. The
languages would differ as to whether DP-movement must take place into all positions or not. In
this article, we are particularly concerned with the phrase which hosts the EPP feature.

538 Laia Arnaus Gil and Natascha Muller

(7) Structure of a German weil-clause with V-final order
CP

C

TP
vP

T
tvP

T
weil

sie oft hat
Chopin
gespielt



Following Biberauer & Richards (2006), German main clauses can be derived by
raising of T's complement (vP) to Spec,TP, all things being equal, with further
raising of the finite verb to C and a topicalized constituent to Spec,CP.
(8) Structure of a German V2 main clause
CP

VP

C
C

TP
vP

tvP

Chopin hat sie oft tVP
gespielt



In structure (6), the EPP feature in T is satisfied by movement of a DP into
Spec,TP. In structure (7), DP in Spec,vP piedpipes along the whole vP when it
raises. In structure (8), further movement is accomplished in order to derive the
V2 property of German. We will not expand on the triggers of this movement.
Essentially, the EPP in T is satisfied by an element bearing the categorial feature
[D]; the grammar doesn't mind how. If we evaluate the two derivations (6) and
(7), which are built on identical numerations, with respect to economy, the result
is true optionality.
Summing up: There are different kinds of EPP satisfaction in grammar.
Grammar requires the EPP feature to be satisfied, it doesn't mind how. EPP satisfaction in T is a case of true optionality in grammar. We have distinguished headseeking and spec-seeking languages. More interestingly, German is a spec-seeking
language in which the size of the nominal category which checks the EPP(T)


Acceleration and delay in bilingual, trilingual and multilingual German-Romance children 539

differs. A further result of the comparison between head-seeking and spec-seeking
languages is that a head-seeking language like Italian also allows a DP to check the
EPP(T). The different kinds of EPP satisfaction as head-seeking or spec-seeking
become relevant when early acquisition of this grammatical phenomenon is considered. Whereas German allows the EPP-feature to be satisfied through different
syntactic derivations (all of them semantically vacuous) for main and subordinate
clauses, the Romance languages share with the former one EPP-satisfaction,
namely raising of the subject-DP to Spec,TP. As it will be shown in the following
section on the acquisition of German finite verb placement in early monolingual
and bilingual children, this EPP-satisfaction available to both groups of languages
has an effect on the acquisition of German finite verb placement in main and
subordinate clauses when monolingual and bilingual children are compared. In
what follows, we will briefly look at the acquisition data from the literature and
describe how monolingual and multilingual children from longitudinal studies
deal with this kind of variation.
3. Previous studies on the acquisition of finite verb placement in German
3.1 Main clauses
Previous studies on the acquisition of German main clause word order by monolingual children have observed a so-called verb-final stage (Clahsen, Penke &
Parodi, 1993/1994; Clahsen, Eisenbeiss & Penke, 1996; Jansen, 2015). During this
stage, children produce finite verbs clause-finally, as in the following examples
from Clahsen, Eisenbeiss & Penke (1996, p. 138). In all children, finite verbs
placed clause-finally co-exist with finite verbs which appear in the target-like V2position. The verb-final stage has never been characterized by a complete absence
of target-like V2 clauses. Until now, 6 monolingual German children have been
studied longitudinally from the age of 1;8 to 3;6 (cf. Muller, 2017).
(9) a.

da ni fahrt
there not drives
 `It doesn't drive there'
b. mauschen da reinklettert

little-mouse there in-climbs
 `The litte mouse climbs into it'

In contrast to the monolingual children, bilingual children (from birth) have
been argued to skip the V-final stage in German altogether (cf. Repetto &
Muller, 2010, who analyze 6 bilingual German-Italian children from 1;7-3;6,

540 Laia Arnaus Gil and Natascha Muller

Schmeier & Jansen, 2016, who analyze 3 German-French bilingual children from
1;7-3;6). If the pattern occurs, it does sporadically during language development.
Muller (2017) investigates 4 German-Spanish-Catalan children from the age of
1;6-3;6. Interestingly, they pattern like the bilingual children, i.e. the verb-final
stage is absent.
3.2 Subordinate clauses
Monolingual German children observed in longitudinal studies are reported in
the literature to acquire the V-final property of subordinate clauses in an error-free
fashion (cf. Rothweiler, 1993). Bilingual children take some time to acquire the
target-like verb-final pattern of German subordinate clauses. In her review of the
literature, Muller (1998) finds that the kind of target-deviant German subordinate
clauses differs as a function of the second first language of the bilingual children.
All bilingual children use SVfinX in their subordinate clauses, dass ich habe heute
Geburtstag `that I have today birthday', i.e. this pattern occurs independently of the
specific second first language, French or Italian. Muller (1998) interprets the effect
of the second first language on German as a case of cross-linguistic influence. Some
of the bilingual children do pattern like monolingual German children in that they
use V-final order in subordinate clauses from the very beginning. These children
do not master the Romance language as well as the other children and have been
shown to develop it as a less proficient language in comparison to other bilingual
children (cf. Schmeier & Jansen, 2016, for the relation between proficiency in the
"other" language and cross-linguistic influence).
To sum up the results from multilingual German so far: None of the bilingual
and trilingual children passes through a V-final stage for main clauses, i.e. they
look accelerated with respect to finite verb placement in main clauses if compared
to monolingual German children. Finite verbs are placed in the target-like position from very early on. By contrast, German monolingual children show a stage
in which finite verbs appear clause-finally in main clauses. In subordinate clauses,
most of the bilingual children exhibit a stage which is characterized by targetdeviant (non-V-final) finite verb placement. In contrast to the bilingual children,
German monolingual children are able, from early on, to exclusively place the
German finite verb in subordinate clauses clause-finally. Combining the results for
the children acquiring more than one language, bilinguals (and trilinguals) show
acceleration effects in main clauses and delay effects in subordinate clauses, when
compared to their German monolingual peers.


Acceleration and delay in bilingual, trilingual and multilingual German-Romance children 541

4. Cross-sectional study
In this section, we will present the results of an elicited production task that was
designed to study the acceleration effects in German main clauses. We carried out
this elicited production task within a larger cross-sectional study on the acquisition of several grammatical domains in German and in the Romance languages
French, Spanish and Catalan (cf. Arnaus Gil & Muller, 2018). The participants of
the study were bilingual, trilingual and multilingual children who acquired (at
least) a Romance language together with German. As already mentioned, the study
of children who acquire more than two languages from birth is the focus of the
present article. Our hypothesis relies on the fact that, if acceleration effects of finite
verb placement in German main clauses are due to the acquisition of a Romance
language together with German, trilingual and multilingual children should also
show an advantage towards the acquisition of this grammatical phenomenon, as
already observed in the longitudinal studies for bilingual and trilingual children.
We therefore predict that the bilingual, trilingual and multilingual children who
acquire German together with a Romance language should skip the V-final stage
in German main clauses. They should do so even if their grammar shows other
characteristics of an "early German grammar".
The next section will present the methodology as well as the participants who
took part in this experiment.
4.1 Methodology
4.1.1 Participants
Table 1 illustrates the participants of a cross-sectional study of bilingual, trilingual
and multilingual children who reside in Germany or Spain. The multilingual children speak more than three languages. 91 children who have acquired German
as one of their native languages participated in the study. The bilingual children
range from 3;0-6;8 (Mean Age: 60 months, SD: 14.4). 25 children were bilingual
with German and Spanish, 16 with German and French, 1 with German and
Arabic (cf. Figure 1). 42 children participated in the grammatical test. 38 were in
addition tested with a receptive vocabulary test (cf. Table 1). The trilingual and
multilingual (>3 languages) children ranged from 2;0-9;3 (Mean Age: 54 months,
SD: 16.5). All trilingual and multilingual children participated in the receptive
vocabulary test. The language combinations are illustrated in Figure 1. The vast
majority of children was younger than 6;6, i.e. more or less comparable with the
children of the longitudinal study. The trilingual and multilingual children spoke
at least one Romance language (French fr or Spanish sp) and another Romance

542 Laia Arnaus Gil and Natascha Muller

language (Catalan cat, Italian it, Portuguese port) or other languages like Arabic
(arab), Dutch, English (engl), Hebrew, Russian (rus), together with German (ger).
ger-fr-sp-dutch
ger-fr-sp-engl
ger-sp-port
ger-sp-cat
ger-sp-engl-he brew
ger-fr-rus
ger-sp-rus

Languages

ger-sp-cat-eng
ger-sp-cat-fr
ger-fr-arab
ger-fr-sp
ger-sp-it
ger-fr-it
ger-sp-eng
ger-fr-eng
ger-arab
ger-fr
ger-sp
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Number of children

Figure 1. Language combinations of the bilingual, trilingual and multilingual children
tested6

6. We included one German-Arabic child in our study, a child who did not speak a Romance
language as reported by the institution where the child was tested. Since the parents of this child
came from Morocco, it is likely that the child also heard French, at least from the media which
report on public life. French is still an important language in Morocco, which is why we thought
that it might be important to include her in our study.

Acceleration and delay in bilingual, trilingual and multilingual German-Romance children 543


Table 1. The children of the cross-sectional study
Type of multilingualism

Bilingual

Trilingual

Multilingual

grammatical test participation

42

42

7

receptive vocabulary participation

38

42

7

4.1.2 Receptive vocabulary task PPVT
We measured language proficiency with the PPVT (Peabody Picture Vocabulary
Test, Dunn, 1959; Dunn & Dunn, 1981, 1997) from which the size of the receptive
(hearing) vocabulary can be inferred. The test was used in order to be able to
distribute the children in groups independently of their age. The PPVT has been
chosen because a German version was available from 2015, designed by Lenhard,
Lenhard, Segerer & Suggate (2015) and there is a corresponding standardized receptive vocabulary test in the other L1s of the bi-, tri- and multilingual children.7
The test was administered with 38 of the 42 bilingual and with all trilingual and
multilingual children. The German test covers a broad range of German-language
words (adjectives, verbs, nouns). Children between the age of 3;0 and 16;11 can
be tested. The administration took 20 minutes across all children.8 It consists of
228 items equally distributed across 19 item-sets (1 item-set equals 12 items). The
examiner presents a page with four pictures to the child. S/he produces a word
and asks the child to point to the picture that describes the word. The (in)correct
responses are noted on a record form.
The German PPVT has been designed on the basis of a representative norming
sample of 3555 children in Germany, 29% of whom had one parent born outside
Germany. A raw score is transformed into an age-dependent t-value which is
linguistically described as the following 6 categories (Lenhard et al. 2015, p. 54).9
These categories represent the child's vocabulary stage at the moment of testing,
having taken the age-dependent variable into consideration. For instance, if the
child scored moderately high, this means that his/her vocabulary is higher than
the norming sample at this age.
7. The choice for the PPVT was, among others, motivated by the fact that in addition to German,
the test was available in French and Spanish, all the languages which were tested in the bilingual,
trilingual and multilingual children in order to be able to determine the children's proficiency
in the respective other language(s). The children's results in the French and Spanish PPVT are
of no importance here.
8. The mean reaction time for each item in the test was 13.27 seconds.
9. The ranges of t-values for the six categories are: 70 and less for extremely high, 60-70
moderately high, 50-60 high average, 40-50 low average, 30-40 moderately low, 20 and below
extremely low.

544 Laia Arnaus Gil and Natascha Muller
high: extremely high

} equals 3 "high" in Figures 2 and 3

high: moderately high

} equals 3 "high" in Figures 2 and 3

average: high average

} equals 2 "average" in Figures 2 and 3

average: low average

} equals 2 "average" in Figures 2 and 3

low: moderately low

} equals 1 "low" in Figures 2 and 3

low: extremely low

} equals 1 "low" in Figures 2 and 3

The PPVT is a standardized test designed for typically developing Germanspeaking children to analyze their vocabulary development and in clinical assessment in order to detect language impairments. The test offers a comparison with
children who speak German as their native language (control groups) in several
age groups. In the present case, it was used to measure the linguistic competence
in the different L1s of children who acquire more than one language from birth.
A small number of children (23) had to be tested before the German version of the PPVT was published. These children were tested with the WPPSI-III
(Wechsler Preschool and Primary Scale of Intelligence, 3rd Edition), Petermann,
20112). The test was designed on the basis of a representative norming sample
of 710 children in Germany. Information about the migration background of the
parent(s) is missing. The WPPSI-III is designed to determine and measure the
cognitive capacities (different factors of intelligence) of children between 3;0 and
7;2. It differentiates between 3;0-3;11-year-olds and 4;0-7;2-year-olds. One of the
measures is the receptive (hearing) vocabulary test (which leads to determine,
among other tests, the verbal IQ). 31 items are introduced by "show me ...", a
similar method as in the PPVT. The test covers a range of German-language
content words and syntactic categories (adjectives, nouns, verbs). In contrast to
the PPVT which uses a t-norm-scale (with a mean of 50), the WPPSI-III uses
scaled scores (with a mean of 10). As with the PPVT, a raw score is transformed
into an age-dependent scaled score. The value-points can then be transferred into
the linguistic categories of the PPVT, namely extremely low, moderately low, high
average, low average, moderately high and extremely high.
By measuring the receptive vocabulary of the bi-, tri- and multilingual children, we wanted to be able to classify the children not by age but according to
an independent variable, such as (receptive) vocabulary knowledge in the target
language. Other proficiency measures, such as MLU, words per minute or Upper
Bound, could have also been used. However, this would have implied a spontaneous recording of all L1s of the bi-, tri- and multilingual children in addition to the
elicitation task, which would have extended the testing phase enormously. In this
respect, the PPVT is essentially more feasible than other measures. Moreover, it
provides a standardized method that, as we mentioned previously, is available in
the other L1s of the children and, thus, a comparison of the proficiency among the


Acceleration and delay in bilingual, trilingual and multilingual German-Romance children 545

children's L1s was possible. Notice, however, that the test results in the receptive
vocabulary task were only used to group the children independently of age. In the
present paper, we will not analyze the performance of the bi-, tri- and multilingual
children in the vocabulary test.
Concerning the results in the receptive vocabulary tests, two thirds (68%) of
the bilingual children (cf. Figure 2) and half (47%) of the children who acquire

Result in receptive vocabulary test:
1 = low, 2 = average, 3 = high

3

2

1

0

20

40

60
Age in months

80

100

120

Figure 2. Vocabulary knowledge in the German PPVT: Bilingual children

Result in receptive vocabulary test:
1 = low, 2 = average, 3 = high

3

2

1
0

20

40

60

80

100

Age in months

Figure 3. Vocabulary knowledge in the German PPVT: Trilingual and multilingual
children

120

546 Laia Arnaus Gil and Natascha Muller

more than two languages from birth (cf. Figure 3) reached average results. Needless
to say, this is an interesting result as such which, however, will not be the focus of
the following discussion of the children's performance in the grammatical test (cf.
Sivakumar, Muller & Arnaus Gil 2018, Sette, Huppop & Arnaus Gil 2018).
4.1.3 The Crazy-House-Test
The main focus of this article is the acquisition of verb placement in main clauses
in German. That is why we developed a grammatical test that elicited finite verbs
in German. It was administered in German with all participants (42 bilingual, 42
trilingual and 7 multilingual children). The adult experimenter was monolingual
German and only spoke German to the child. The test was composed of a house
with windows which the child was supposed to open at her/his own choice. The
house was introduced as hosting crazy animals that do strange things. A mole was
shown to the child. Moles live under ground and have poor eye sight. The child
was asked by the experimenter to open the windows one after the other and describe to the mole what the animals do (play the guitar (bees), kiss a ball (bear), eat
a bouquet (mouse), bake a shoe (monkey), clean a car with a toothbrush (dog)).
The actions are all untypical for the respective animals. This method was chosen
in order to attract the children's attention and in order to guarantee spontaneous
production. All verbs are transitive since the position of the finite verb is unambiguously V2 or V-final in German. The experimenter asked the question: What
happens? Figure 4 illustrates the crazy house.10

Figure 4. German crazy house
10. One reviewer correctly asks the question of whether the task is appropriate for all the
participants. This is indeed one of the problems which researchers who work with multilingual

Acceleration and delay in bilingual, trilingual and multilingual German-Romance children 547


4.2 Results
The Crazy-House-Test successfully elicited finite verbs, more so in bilingual as in
tri/multilingual children. The difference in the amount of responses between both
the bilingual and the tri-/multilingual groups is statistically significant (t(8) = 8,86,
p < 0.01). This result is illustrated in Figure 5. Some examples are given in (10), all
from trilingual children.
und hier spielen die bienen gitarre `and here play the bees guitar' 

(Brisa, 7;10,13)
 b. der kusst ihn `he kisses it' 
(Claire, 4;7,5)
 c. die esst die blumen `she eats the flowers' 
(Maria, 4;6,7)
 d. der kochaffe backt ein stiefel `the cocking-monkey bakes a boot' 

(Allan, 4;5,14)
 e. ein hund putzt mit eine zahnburste ein auto `a dog cleans with a
toothbrush a car' 
(Alba, 5;1,1)
(10) a.

100
90
81

80
70

68

60
50

76

70

51

68
55

55

53

mouse

monkey

57

40
30
20
10
0

bees
bilinguals

bear

dog

tri- and multilinguals

Figure 5. Usage of finite verbs according to item: 42 bilinguals, 42 trilinguals, 7 multilinguals
children have to face. Further below, we will point out that some children at a rather advanced
age ranked low in the PPVT; as a consequence, they used constructions in German which
monolingual children use during a stage when they produce root infinitives. Experimental research remains a problem in children with more than one language since one of their languages
can develop outside the norm. This type of information is unknown to the researcher when the
participants are recruited for the experiment.

548 Laia Arnaus Gil and Natascha Muller

Interestingly, none of the children used a finite verb clause-finally in main clauses,
neither the bilingual, who produced overall 152 finite constructions, nor the trilingual or multilingual children, who produced 144 finite constructions. In other
words, the result of the longitudinal study is supported. One might object that
the children in the cross-sectional study were older (their mean age was 60 and
54 months respectively) than the children studied longitudinally in the literature.
Therefore, it could be claimed that the children who participated in the crosssectional study might have passed the verb-final stage already. Since age is not
a reliable measure (especially in children who acquire more than one language)
and they can develop one or more of their languages at a rather slow pace, we
will analyze their responses in the grammatical test according to the results in the
receptive vocabulary task. We will thus show that the absence of V-final structures in main clauses is characteristic of the development of German in bilingual,
trilingual and multilingual children at a stage at which other characteristics of an
early German grammar are present, such as root infinitives and verb stems (cf.
Figure 9 below). First of all, we would like to show the usage of finite verbs in the
Crazy-House-Test in relation with the language proficiency as measured in the
receptive vocabulary tests. This can be seen in Figure 6.
n=3

100
90

n=4

n = 26
n = 23

80
70
60
50

n=7

40
30
n = 23

20
10
0

High
bilinguals

Average

Low

tri- and multilinguals

Figure 6. Usage of finite verbs according to proficiency in receptive vocabulary test: bi-,
tri- and multilingual children


Acceleration and delay in bilingual, trilingual and multilingual German-Romance children 549

There were 7 bilingual and 23 trilingual and multilingual children who ranked low
with respect to the receptive vocabulary. Figure 6 shows that the usage of finite
verbs was much lower in these children. In what follows, we would like to point out
some interesting aspects for future research with the aid of simple correlations. The
correlation between the proficiency in the receptive vocabulary test and the CrazyHouse-Test was r = 0.38 in the bilingual children and, more importantly, r = 0.78 in
the tri-/multilingual children. The correlation results are based on the ranking of
the children in the PPVT (value 1 to 3, i.e. low, average, and high) and the ranking
achieved in the grammatical test (value 6 = 6 finite verbs in 6 obligatory contexts,
value 5 = 5 finite verbs in 5 obligatory contexts, etc.). The results can be graphically
seen in Figures 7 and 8, respectively. The numbers around the circle represent the
result of each child according to the German PPVT (1 = low, 2 = average, 3 = high),
whereas the numbers that go inside the circle stand for the total number of possible
productions of German finite verbs. Especially for the trilingual and multilingual
children, lower results in the receptive vocabulary test increased the tendency not
to respond with a finite verb in the grammatical test (cf. Figure 8). We carried out
a t-test to see whether the results in the Crazy-House-test and in the receptive vocabulary task are statistically significant. For both groups, namely the bilinguals on
the one hand, and the tri- and multilinguals, on the other hand, the relation between
the results in the grammatical test and in the PPVT (depending on the children's
ranking into the categories in Figure 6) are statistically significant (for the bilinguals:
t(37) = 10,60, p < 0.01; for the tri- and multilinguals: t(47) = 9,23, p < 0.01). Finally,
there is no statistical difference between both groups (t(6) = 0,331, p > .05).

1

1

1

2
6

3

3

3

5

1

3

2
2

4

1

2

3

1

2

2

1

2

1

2

2

0

2

2

2

2
2

2
2

2
2
2

Figure 7.

2
2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

550 Laia Arnaus Gil and Natascha Muller

1

1

1

1

1

1

1 61

3

3

3

2

5

2

2

4

2

2

3

1

2
2

2

1
1
1
1
1

2
2
2
2
2

1
0

1

2
1

1

1

1

1

1

1

2

2

2

2 2

2

2

2

2

2

Figure 8.
Figure 7 and 8. Correlation of usage of finite verbs and proficiency in receptive vocabulary test: Bilingual and tri-/multilingual children, respectively

From Figures 7 and 8 above, we have observed that there seems to be a correlation between the results of the PPVT and the success in the production of German
finite verbs during the Crazy-House-Test. In the latter, we are interested to know
what kind of responses those children produced who ranked low in the receptive
vocabulary test. In other words, we want to know whether the children with a low
proficiency in German show characteristics of an early grammar in German, as the
younger bilingual children in the longitudinal studies in the literature suggest.11
Interestingly, the test elicited all kinds of responses which are characteristic of an
early stage in the development of German, except for finite verbs in clause-final
position in main clauses. The children used a German DP / PP (cf. 11a), a German
bare noun (cf. 11b), a root infinitive (cf. 11c), a verb stem (cf. 11d) or a DP in the
other language or a reaction like ich wei nicht `I don't know'.
(11)




a.
b.
c.
d.

ein biene "a bee" / in de fuball "in the football"
maus "mouse"
essen "to eat" / die sauber gemacht "it clean made"
die biene tanz "the bee dance"

11. According to Kauschke (2013), there is a relation between vocabulary size and (later) grammatical skills.


Acceleration and delay in bilingual, trilingual and multilingual German-Romance children 551

In Figure 9, the 30 children who ranked low in the receptive vocabulary test are
represented. The majority of responses are found with a finite verb (26%). Root infinitives and verb stems were produced in 13% and in 6% of the cases, respectively.
Many responses did not contain a verb at all (30%), but were just composed of a
bare noun/DP or a PP. The children's alternative responses are typical of children
at an early stage in the development of German. And so would the productions
of finite verbs placed clause-finally during these early stages. Importantly, in the
Crazy-House-Test, the finite verb was never placed clause-finally.
verb stem

type of response

bare N

root infinitive

DP / PP

no response / response in other language

Vfin
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

absolute number

Figure 9. Responses of the children who ranked low in the receptive vocabulary test

4.3 A glance at German subordinate clauses
The Crazy-House-Test elicited only 35 German subordinate clauses. The number
is too small in order to be studied here. All clauses which did not show a target-like
finite verb in clause-final position are listed in (12) and come from a handful of
bilingual and trilingual children. The examples also contain information about the
children's language combination.
(12) Balthasar (4;11,6): bienen die spielen musik `bees they make music'
 ger-fr ein hund der kusst ein ball `a dog who kisses a ball'
 eine maus, die knabbert blumen `a mouse who
nibbles flowers'

552 Laia Arnaus Gil and Natascha Muller









Sophie-Alixiane (5;8,25): hier ist eine maus die gibt - die esst blumen
ger-fr `here is a mouse which gives - which eats flowers'
Antoine (4;10,4): ein bar, der pustet einen ball
ger-fr `a bear who blows on a ball'
Claire (4;7,5): das sind bienen die machen musik
ger-fr-eng `these are bees who make music'
Pol (5;10,4):da ist ne maus die hat die in der hand und isst die
ger-sp-cat
blumen auf

`these is a mouse who has it in the hand and eats
the flowers up'
 da ist ein affe der kocht einen schuh
 `there is a monkey who cooks a shoe'
 Keyo (7;4):und in der garage ist ein hund der putzt mit einer
ger-fr-eng
zahnburste sein auto

`and in the garage is a dog who brushes with his
toothbrush his car'

As can be seen from the examples, all clauses which contain a finite verb in nonfinal position are relative clauses. Since the test was not designed to elicit dependent
clauses, production was rare and only observed in a very small number of children.
Therefore, we cannot discuss the issue further. An individual analysis of the data
shows, however, that those children who produce finite verbs in V2-position in
relative clauses (n = 6) never place the finite verb clause-finally in this syntactic
context. Put differently, relative clauses with verb-final order are systematically absent in these children. We have pointed out in Section 2 that adult German allows
V2 in non-root contexts. It must remain for future research whether the absence
of verb-final order in (12) indicates that they have overgeneralized non-V-final
order in the same way as the bilingual children presented in Section 3.2. A further
observation worth to mention is that the six children have reached at least average
results in the PPVT in their Romance language(s) (cf. Table 2). Future research
should therefore test the generalization presented on the basis of the longitudinal
studies in Section 3.2, namely that good proficiency in the Romance language(s)
fosters V2 in German subordinate clauses (and low proficiency in the Romance
language(s) leads to the target-system right away).
One could claim that the use of relative clauses is attributable only to those
bi-, tri- and multilingual children who produced at least average or high results
in the receptive vocabulary test, since their language competence allows this kind
of complex constructions. One reviewer points out that children who were low in
the PPVT might have avoided using relative clauses, arguably due to complexity
reasons. In fact, those children in the low category did not produce any relative
clause, yet they were able to produce a remarkable number of finite verbs as a

Acceleration and delay in bilingual, trilingual and multilingual German-Romance children 553


Table 2. Proficiency level reached in the Romance language(s): Children with V2 relative
clauses
Child

PPVT in French

Balthasar

average

Sophie-Alixiane

average

Antoine

high

Claire

average

Pol
Keyo

PPVT in Spanish

PPVT in Catalan

high

average

high

response and thus, to our view, complexity cannot explain these results. Moreover,
when relative clauses where produced, they were never verb-final. One could
doubt that these productions are actually relative clauses. Put differently, these
could be examples of (left) dislocations with a resumptive pronoun. Summarizing,
we believe that the absence of relative clauses in the children's productions have
lesser to do with their proficiency in the receptive vocabulary task but with the
grammatical test itself. More research in this direction has to be done.
5. Discussion
Following Biberauer & Richards (2006), the EPP feature of T can be satisfied in
different ways. If the language is of the spec-seeking type, there are two possibilities: Either the DP in Spec,vP is raised to Spec,TP (in which case the finite verb
surfaces in non-clause-final position) or it is piedpiped to Spec,TP. In the latter
case, the whole vP is placed in the specifier of TP, giving rise to V-final patterns.
Within this framework, the alternation between main clauses which exhibit
clause-final and V2 patterns in monolingual German is reminiscent of the child's
effort to find out which of the two possible means to satisfy the EPP feature in T
is the correct one. Our review of the literature on German monolingual children
has shown that the monolingual child makes use of two ways of satisfying the EPP
feature from early on. The present study has revealed that the bilingual, trilingual
and multilingual children tested are characterized by the absence of a V-final
stage. In other words, as observed already by Meisel (1989, p. 27), children who
acquire more than one native language exhibit less (word order) variability. In
main clauses, bilingual, trilingual and multilingual children, as opposed to monolingual children, seem to strongly prefer Spec-raising to Spec-piedpiping, thus the
predominance of non-clause-final positioning of finite verbs. Spec-raising is also
preferred by the bilinguals in subordinate clauses observed in longitudinal studies,

554 Laia Arnaus Gil and Natascha Muller

although here Spec-piedpiping is necessary in order for the finite verb to appear
clause-finally. The present study was not designed to elicit subordinate clauses and
can therefore not contribute to this last aspect. Our review of the literature has
illustrated, however, that the bilinguals with an average/high proficiency level in
the Romance language are the ones who show "too many" Spec-raising cases in
German subordinate clauses (cf. Table 2 and examples in 12).
Romance languages differ with respect to the source of the nominal category
([D] in a head category or a Spec) that values the EPP feature in T. French is a
non-pro-drop language. The [D] category which values the EPP feature in T must
be a DP and cannot be a verb. In the framework of Biberauer & Richards (2006),
French is a language which always requires Spec-raising of the DP in the Spec,vP
position. In contrast, Italian and Spanish are pro-drop languages. Here, the verb is
argued to satisfy the EPP in T. In Section 2, we have observed that in Italian, apart
from VD, EPP(T)-satisfaction can be achieved by raising the subject-DP in Spec,vP
into Spec,TP, as in French. The same is true for Spanish where non-null subjects
do not always encode contrast or shift of topic (cf. Lubbers Quesada & Blackwell,
2009, for an overview). All children tested acquire either French or Spanish (or
both) together with German. These languages share the possibility of Spec-raising
of the subject DP into Spec,TP. In other words, all languages allow Spec-raising
of the subject DP in order to satisfy the EPP(T). From this, the behavior of the
bilingual, trilingual and multilingual children in German falls out rather naturally.
Piedpiping, which results in V-final clauses, is specific to German; none of the
Romance languages is a spec-seeking language which piedpipes vP into the specifier of TP. Raising, which results in non-V-final clauses, is possible in German and
in the Romance languages and the bilingual, trilingual and multilingual children
exploit this (default) possibility much more frequently in German than their
monolingual peers. We can thus claim that they show cross-linguistic influence
from the Romance languages into German.
The V-final stage is a target-deviant stage exhibited in monolingual German
children. In the present study, the bilingual, trilingual and multilingual children,
despite being older than the children studied longitudinally in the literature, did
not show evidence of this stage (although those children who ranked low in the
German receptive vocabulary test show other constructions which are characteristic of an early development of the German grammar). The effect of the influence of
the Romance language(s) could be argued to be acceleration, i.e., a booster effect.
However, the overall effect of the influence can only be judged if we take into
account subordinate clauses as well which were not included in the cross-sectional
study. Notice, however, that we observed, in some of the children tested, that relative clauses with (target-like) verb-final order are systematically absent. From this
observation, we may conclude carefully that finite verb placement in the bilingual,


Acceleration and delay in bilingual, trilingual and multilingual German-Romance children 555

trilingual and multilingual children is generally (for main and subordinate clauses)
characterized by an overuse of DP-raising into Spec,TP. This looks as an advantage
in main and as a disadvantage in subordinate clauses.
One question remains. Why are there no children who acquire more than one
language from birth and who pass through the V-final stage for German main
clauses, children who are not highly proficient in their Romance language(s)? We
believe that the answer to this question boils down to the following issue which is
related to the adult German system: If it is true that grammar doesn't mind how
the EPP(T) is satisfied, and if it is true that one language can allow for more than
one possibility of feature satisfaction (with DP-raising to Spec,TP being present in
all the languages of the children), what exactly determines which of the options
is favored? Pragmatics is a good candidate. Let us take the null-subject languages
as an example. Topic salience, usage of an unmarked form in order to alternate
interpretation, expression of pragmatic weight for personally more relevant utterances etc., come to mind if the expression of subject pronouns is analyzed in
non-contrastive and non-focused contexts. If this is also true for adult German V2
and V-final clauses, the kind of cross-linguistic influence described here perfectly
matches with what has been claimed by Muller & Hulk (2001) as one prerequisite
for cross-linguistic influence to occur: the location of the grammatical property
at the interface between syntax and pragmatics. The devices to satisfy the EPP(T)
are innate and optional in creating syntactic variants having exactly the same
semantic interpretation. Their pragmatics differs, though. The bilingual, trilingual
and multilingual children overuse the device which is present in German and
the Romance languages, namely DP-raising into Spec,TP. We would surely advance our understanding of cross-linguistic influence if we analyze the children's
German utterances against their pragmatic background. In other words, is it possible that the bilingual, trilingual and multilingual child takes V2 (Spec-raising of
DP into Spec,TP) to express what monolingual children would express by using
V-final (piedpiping into Spec,TP)? If yes, what looks as more or less variation in
bilinguals, trilinguals and multilinguals in comparison with monolinguals can be
reduced to the different mapping of syntactic devices to pragmatic interpretations.
We would like to conclude our paper with a result which seems to be straightforward for the linguist, but which is rather outstanding for broader society:
The trilingual and multilingual children in our study performed "damn right"!
No need to worry!

556 Laia Arnaus Gil and Natascha Muller

Funding
This work was supported by a grant from the German Science Foundation (MU 875/12-1),
awarded to Laia Arnaus Gil and Natascha Muller.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the reviewers and editors for their useful and valuable comments on this
paper. Moreover, we would like to express our deepest gratitude to those multilingual families
who made this investigation possible by enroling their children in our study.

References
Alexiadou, A. & Anagnostopoulou, E. (1998). Parametrizing AGR: Word order, V-movement,
and EPP-checking. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 16, 491-540. 
https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1006090432389

Anderssen, M., Bentzen, K. & Westergaard, M. (2010). Variation in the Input. Studies in the
Acquisition of Word Order. Dordrecht, Heidelberg, London, New York: Springer.
Arnaus Gil, L. & Muller, N. (2018). French postverbal subjects: A comparison of monolingual,
bilingual, trilingual and multilingual French. Languages 3(3), 1-28. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/languages3010001

Biberauer, T. & Richards, M. (2006). True optionality: when grammar doesn't mind. In C.
Boeckx (Ed.), Minimalist Essays. Amsterdam: Benjamins, 35-67. 
https://doi.org/10.1075/la.91.08bib

Cardinaletti, A. (2004). Toward a cartography of subject positions. In L. Rizzi (Ed.), The Structure of CP and IP. The Cartography of Syntactic Structures 2. New York: Oxford University
Press, 115-165.
Chomsky, N. (1981). Lectures on Government and Binding. The Pisa Lectures. Dordrecht: Foris.
Chomsky, N. (1995). The Minimalist Program. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Chomsky, N. (2013). Problems of projection. Lingua 130, 33-49. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lingua.2012.12.003

Chomsky, N. (2015). Problems of projection. Extensions. In E. Di Domenico, C. Hamann &
S. Matteini (Eds.), Structures, Strategies and Beyond: Studies in honour of Adriana Belletti.
Amsterdam: Benjamins, 1-16. https://doi.org/10.1075/la.223.01cho
Clahsen, H., Eisenbeiss, S. & Penke, M. (1996). Lexical learning in early syntactic development.
In H. Clahsen & W. Rutherford (Eds.), Generative Perspectives on Language Acquisition.
Benjamins: Amsterdam/Philadelphia, 129-159. https://doi.org/10.1075/lald.14.08cla
Clahsen, H., Penke, M. & Parodi, T. (1993/1994). Functional categories in early child German.
Language Acquisition 3, 395-429. https://doi.org/10.1207/s15327817la0304_3
den Besten, H. (1983). On the interaction of roots transformations and lexical deletive rules.
In W. Abraham (Ed.), On the Formal Syntax of the Westgermania. Amsterdam: Benjamins,
47-131. https://doi.org/10.1075/la.3.03bes
Dunn, L. M. (1959). Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test. American Guidance Service: Circle Pines,
MN.

Acceleration and delay in bilingual, trilingual and multilingual German-Romance children 557

Dunn, L. M. & Dunn, L. M. (1981). Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test - Revised. American Guidance Service: Circle Pines, MN.
Dunn, L. M. & Dunn, L. M. (1997). Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test, Third Edition. American
Guidance Service: Circle Pines, MN.
Freywald, U. (2013). Uneingeleiteter V1- und V2-Satz. In J. Meibauer, M. Steinbach & H. Altmann (Eds.), Satztypen des Deutschen. Berlin, Boston: De Gruyter, 317-337.
Gawlitzek-Maiwald, I. & Tracy, R. (1996). Bilingual bootstrapping. Linguistics 34, 901-926. 
https://doi.org/10.1515/ling.1996.34.5.901

Jansen, V. (2015). Dislokation im bilingualen Erstspracherwerb. Eine Untersuchung am Beispiel
deutsch-franzosischer Kinder. Berlin/Munchen/Boston: de Gruyter.
Kupisch, T. (2006). The Acquisition of Determiners in Bilingual German-Italian and GermanFrench Children. Lincom Europa: Munchen.
Kauschke, C. (2013). The interrelation between lexical and grammatical abilities in early language acquisition. In S. Bartsch & D. Bittner (Eds.), Lexical Bootstrapping - the Role of Lexis
and Semantics in Child Language Development. Mouton de Gruyter: Berlin, 143-164.
Lenhard, A., Lenhard, W., Segerer, R. & Suggate, S. (2015). Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test - 4.
Edition. Pearson: Frankfurt am Main.
Liceras, J., Fernandez Fuertes, R. & Alba de la Fuente, A. (2011). Overt subjects and copula
omission in the Spanish and the English grammar of English-Spanish bilinguals. On the
locus and directionality of interlinguistic influence. First Language 32(1-2), 88-115. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0142723711403980

Lubbers Quesada, M. & Blackwell, S. E. (2009). The L2 acquisition of null and overt Spanish
subject pronouns: A pragmatic approach. In J. Collentine, M. Garcia, B. Lafford & F. M.
Marin (Eds.), Selected Proceedings of the 11th Hispanic Linguistics Symposium. Somerville,
MA: Cascadilla, 117-130.
Meisel, J. (1989). Early differentiation of languages in bilingual children. In K. Hyltenstam &
L. Obler (eds) Bilingualism Across the Lifespan: Aspects of Acquisition, Maturity, and Loss.
Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, 13-40. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511611780.003

Muller, N. (1998). Transfer in bilingual first language acquisition. Bilingualism: Language and
Cognition 1(3), 151-171. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1366728998000261
Muller, N. (2017). Different sources of delay and acceleration in early child bilingualism.
Zeitschrift fur Sprachwissenschaft 36(1), 7-30. https://doi.org/10.1515/zfs-2017-0002
Muller, N. & Hulk, A. (2001). Crosslinguistic influence in bilingual language acquisition: Italian
and French as recipient languages. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition 4(1), 1-21.
Paradis, J. & Genesee, F. (1996). Syntactic acquisition in bilingual children: Autonomous or
interdependent? Studies in Second Language Acquisition 18, 1-25. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263100014662

Patuto, M., Repetto, V. & Muller, N. (2011). Delay and acceleration in bilingual first language
acquisition: the same or different? In E. Rinke & T. Kupisch (Eds.), The Development of
Grammar: Language Acquisition and Diachronic Change. Volume in Honor of Jurgen M.
Meisel. Amsterdam, Philadelphia: Benjamins, 231-261. 
https://doi.org/10.1075/hsm.11.13pat

Repetto, V. & Muller, N. (2010). The acquisition of German V2 in bilingual Italian-German
children residing in Germany and Italy: a case of acceleration? In V. Torrens, L. Escobar, A.
Gavarro & J. Gutierrez (Eds.), Movement and Clitics: Adult and Child Grammar. Newcastle
upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 155-184.

558 Laia Arnaus Gil and Natascha Muller
Rizzi, L. (1982). Issues in Italian Syntax. Foris: Dordrecht. 
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110883718

Rizzi, L. (1996). Residual Verb Second and the Wh-Criterion. In A. Belletti & L. Rizzi (Eds.),
Parameters and Functional Heads. New York, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 63-90.
Rothweiler, M. (1993). Nebensatzerwerb im Deutschen. Eine Pilotstudie. Tubingen: Niemeyer.
Schmeier, A. & Jansen, V. (2016). Finite verb placement in French language change and in
bilingual German-French language acquisition. In K. Schmitz, P. Guijarro-Fuentes & N.
Muller (Eds.), The Acquisition of French in its Different Constellations. Multilingual Matters:
Bristol, 10-42.
Sette, N., M. Huppop & L. Arnaus Gil (2018). Active bi- and trilingualism and its influencing
factors. Submitted.
Sivakumar, A., N. Muller & L. Arnaus Gil (2018). Die Entwicklung des rezeptiven Wortschatzes
bei bi-, tri- und multilingual aufwachsenden Kindern. Submitted.
Sorace, A., Serratrice, L., Filiaci, F., & Baldo, M. (2009). Discourse conditions on subject pronoun realization: testing the linguistic intuitions of older bilingual children. Lingua 119,
460-477. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lingua.2008.09.008
Truckenbrodt, H. (2013). Selbstandige Verb-Letzt-Satze. In J. Meibauer, M. Steinbach & H.
Altmann (Eds.), Satztypen des Deutschen. Berlin: de Gruyter, 232-246.

Address for correspondence
Laia Arnaus Gil
Bergische Universitat Wuppertal
Faculty 1 - Romance Linguistics
Gaustrae 20 42119 Wuppertal
Germany
arnaus@uni-wuppertal.de

Co-author details
Natascha Muller
Bergische Universitat Wuppertal
Faculty 1 - Romance Linguistics
Gaustrae 20
Germany
nmueller@uni-wuppertal.de

Publication history
Date received: 6 December 2017
Date accepted: 15 August 2018
Published online: 13 November 2018

