Journal of Memory and Language 117 (2021) 104186

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Memory and Language
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jml

Ordinary memory processes in the design of referring expressions
Kieran J. O'Shea *, Caitlyn R. Martin , Dale J. Barr
Institute of Neuroscience and Psychology, University of Glasgow, 62 Hillhead St., Glasgow G12 8QB, United Kingdom

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Audience design
Language production
Memory retrieval
Memory processes
Communication
Common ground

How do speakers produce referential descriptions that satisfy addressees' informational needs during real-time
conversation? A recent proposal is that ordinary memory processes can serve as a proxy for the consideration
of common ground. But this is only possible if speakers encode and access sufficiently detailed memory repre
sentations. We tested this proposal by having speakers describe referents in contexts varying in perceptual
similarity to previous contexts in the dialogue. Based on the analysis of a total of 4,817 descriptions from 112
speakers over three experiments, we found little evidence that contextual similarity modulated the informational
content of speakers' descriptions, regardless of whether that similarity was based on configurational cues (Exps.
1 and 2), or on the perceptual experience of interacting with a conversational partner (Exp. 3). In contrast,
speakers did modulate their descriptions when their beliefs about the addressee changed, even when the
perceptual match between encoding and retrieval contexts was identical. This suggests that the episodic rep
resentations accessed during message generation may be too impoverished to serve as an effective proxy for
common ground.

When planning spoken referential expressions, speakers face many
potential choices about what to say and how to say it. What psycho
logical factors govern these choices? It is generally assumed that when
planning messages, speakers are beholden to the cooperative principle
that underlies conversational interaction (Grice, 1975). Accordingly,
speakers should formulate references that convey no more and no less
information than their addressee would need to identify the referent of
the expression against the background of their common ground: the set
of assumptions, beliefs, and knowledge that is shared, and known to be
shared with their interlocutors (Clark & Marshall, 1981). Because of the
complex nature of reasoning about common ground--i.e., about what
you know that I know that you know, etc.--it is assumed that in
terlocutors assess common ground using a set of simpler co-presence
heuristics. For instance, interlocutors who can mutually see a vase on a
table can assume the vase to be part of their common ground, based on
its physical co-presence. It is also assumed that interlocutors keep track of
things that have been said during a conversation--for instance, what
objects have been mentioned and how they were described--and that
these things form part of their common ground by virtue of their lin
guistic co-presence. Finally, they can assume certain information to be

part of their common ground based on their mutual belonging to a
common community (e.g., sports club, internet group, family, etc.)
through the heuristic of community membership (Clark & Marshall,
1981).
Constructing expressions on the basis of this common ground--a
process known as audience design (Clark & Murphy, 1982)--can help
promote successful communication. However, within the cognitive de
mands of real-time conversation, common ground can be too uncertain
or computationally demanding to estimate and track. It would be ex
pected, then, that speakers use certain shortcuts to make reference
generation more efficient.
One such shortcut is to plan utterances relying only on information
salient to the self--i.e., without first checking whether it forms part of
the common ground--and to allocate cognitive resources to monitoring
and adjusting the contextual appropriateness of the expression under
construction (Horton & Keysar, 1996). For instance, a speaker might
generate a plan to refer to a candle as the small candle to distinguish it
from a larger one she knows about, or because that is the way that she
referred to this object previously in the discourse, making this descrip
tion salient. She may rely on the knowledge of the larger circle or the


Thanks to David Ralston and Sophie MacAskill for assistance with pilot studies, and to Holly Branigan and Simon Garrod for comments on the PhD thesis on
which this article is based. Code and data are available at https://osf.io/89g5b. This work was made possible by a Doctoral Training Fellowship to Kieran J. O'Shea
from the UK Economic and Social Research Council.
* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: kieran.o'shea@glasgow.ac.uk (K.J. O'Shea), dale.barr@glasgow.ac.uk (D.J. Barr).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2020.104186
Received 7 May 2020; Received in revised form 4 September 2020; Accepted 21 October 2020
Available online 23 November 2020
0749-596X/(c) 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

K.J. O'Shea et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 117 (2021) 104186

that is needed for a judgment is effortful to compute and there is a
heuristic attribute available that is correlated with the target attribute,
allowing the decision maker to use the latter as a proxy for the former. In
the case of reference generation, prior theorizing suggests that the
strength of a memory signal associated with a particular referring
expression could be a heuristic attribute that can be substituted for the
target attribute of common ground. When the speaker attends to a
referent with a referential goal, various candidate expressions would
become available through memory resonance processes, and the speaker
could assess their relative appropriateness in the context through their
relative activation strengths (Gann & Barr, 2014). Similarly, Horton and
Gerrig (2016) propose that during early stages of utterance generation,
retrieval strength could provide a primitive form of commonality
assessment, with strength of activation providing a surrogate for more
explicit computation of common ground.
To the extent that memory associations correlate with common
ground, ordinary memory processes could make communicatively
relevant information available at minimal cognitive cost. A key predic
tion of the memory-based view is that conversational partners them
selves can act as memory cues, such that the perceptual experiences
arising through interactions with a given partner (e.g., the quality of
their voice, their appearance, or interaction style) become associated
with information that has been shared during those interactions, such
that each encounter with the interaction partner re-instantiates shared
information.
Although the ordinary memory view has been influential, there is
currently little understanding of how, and how much, ordinary memory
processes impact information selection during reference generation. A
common approach to test the ordinary memory view is to manipulate
factors known to affect aspects of memory and assess whether they
impact language processing. For instance, Horton and Gerrig (2005)
demonstrated that factors affecting memory encoding also impact
reference generation, implicating memory as an underlying mechanism.
A later study by Ahn and Brown-Schmidt (2020) looked at retrieval
rather than encoding, testing the hypothesis that partner effects in
referential descriptions should be larger when partner-associated in
formation must be recalled explicitly. Although this hypothesis was not
supported, speakers did use longer descriptions of old referents when
speaking to new addressees than when they continued speaking about
these same referents to old addressees. This finding could be explained
in terms of memory processes--specifically, by assuming that new
partners cued retrieval of old descriptions less strongly than the old
partners--but it could also be explained by assuming speakers just used
common ground at some stage during utterance production.
Another approach for investigating ordinary memory processes in
language processing is to look at whether re-instantiating previous
referential contexts facilitates performance. In picture naming study,
speakers were faster to name pictures when speaking to the same partner
than when speaking to a different partner (Horton, 2007). This suggests
that speakers not only associated previously-produced descriptions with
pictures, but also with the prevailing context, including information
about the identity of the addressee. However, a later replication attempt
called this finding into question (Brown-Schmidt & Horton, 2014). But
even assuming the original effect is real, showing enhancement of a
performance aspect of production (speech onset time) would fall short of
supporting the most important claim of the ordinary memory account
for production: that ordinary memory processes can stand in for com
mon ground in the determination of the informational content of an
expression.
In short, although there has been some support for the ordinary
memory processes in message generation, there is little direct evidence
for the key assumption that it can serve as a proxy for common ground.
Ordinary memory can only be an effective proxy if two conditions are
met: (1) people retain detailed information from previous referring ep
isodes, and (2) these detailed memory representations are accessible to,
and taken into account during, the information selection process. The

existing precedent simply because they are available during the message
generation process (Dell & Brown, 1991), not necessarily because they
are part of common ground with the addressee. Using common ground
may require considerable time and cognitive resources (Horton & Key
sar, 1996; Rossnagel, 2000), which can be in short supply in real-time
conversation. This perspective adjustment strategy of egocentric plan
ning while using common ground during self-monitoring (Horton &
Keysar, 1996) compromises accuracy for efficiency, but may be effective
under the assumption that interaction brings interlocutors' perspectives
into alignment (Pickering & Garrod, 2004). Moreover, relying on
egocentrically available information may not be a huge risk since
communicative situations allow for the collaborative detection and
resolution of miscommunication (Fussell & Krauss, 1992).
Supporting this view, egocentrically-available information reliably
impacts production on a variety of levels, including for example refer
ence generation (Wardlow Lane, Groisman, & Ferreira, 2006), syntax
(Ferreira & Dell, 2000), and the use of pronouns (Fukumura & van
Gompel, 2012). But what exactly is this `egocentric' information, how
does it become accessible in the first place? Unpacking what represen
tations and processes are responsible for making information available
in a timely fashion should be an important goal for any theory of lan
guage production.
There are likely to be many different kinds of factors that influence
the availability of information during reference generation. One
appealing possibility is that availability is partially determined by or
dinary processes of memory encoding and retrieval. This ordinary
memory view (Horton & Gerrig, 2005) assumes that everyday memory
processes can serve as a proxy for common ground, activating poten
tially relevant information naturally and effortlessly through cue-driven,
parallel search processes often characterized in terms of "resonance" (e.
g., Hintzman, 1986).
Consider a speaker who wishes to refer to referent R (e.g., a candle)
in context C (e.g., the speaker's living room, while speaking to a friend)
and finds it necessary to use expression E (e.g., "the small candle") which
includes the modifier `small' because of features of the context (e.g., the
presence of a larger candle). Models of expertise and skill development
(Logan, 1988; Logan & Etherton, 1994) suggest that constructing an
expression for R will at first be done `algorithmically'--that is, through
deliberative mechanisms involved in everyday problem solving. The
cognitive operations and representations involved in this initial assem
bly become stored in memory as an episodic trace: a processing episode
(Logan, 1988). With repetition, the process of generating an expression
will become increasingly automatized--specifically, the production
process will increasingly rely on the wholesale retrieval of expression E
from memory on the basis of R and C, which act as retrieval cues. To the
extent speakers attend to features of the communicative context during
this process (e.g., the environment and audience), these features will
become part of the stored processing episode that link the problem sit
uation (i.e., referring to R in context C) to the output solution (the
expression E), with each repetition strengthening these links.
Such a view of message generation takes advantage of the key
memory principle of encoding specificity: stored information becomes
available in proportion to the overlap between encoding and retrieval
environments (Tulving & Thomson, 1973). The retrieval process may
activate various candidate expressions that the speaker has used for the
same or similar targets in the past (e.g., "the candle", "the red candle",
"the small candle"). Following this principle, the extent to which various
candidates are activated will depend on the similarity between the
current communicative situation and past situations in which these ex
pressions have been used, providing a kind of automatic route for
speakers to produce contextually appropriate references.
Insomuch as similar situations require similar referential expres
sions, ordinary memory processes may offer a shortcut to successful
communication, enacting a process referred to as attribute substitution in
the judgment and decision-making literature (Kahneman & Frederick,
2002). Attribute substitution is likely to occur whenever a target attribute
2

K.J. O'Shea et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 117 (2021) 104186

first assumption is well-supported by a large priming literature indi
cating that people do retain detailed information from past episodes that
can influence future behavior, even after long delays (Tulving &
Schacter, 1990). However, it is possible that these types of priming
processes operate somewhat independently of message planning, influ
encing aspects of performance (such as speech onset latency) while
wielding little or no impact on the selection of information. Thus, it is
critical to assess not only the presence of these largely implicit factors,
but also to measure their impact on the informational content of
speakers' references. These are the main goals of the present set of
studies.

that partners can serve as a memory cue during message generation. We
also independently measured whether speakers kept track of common
ground. Although speakers' descriptions were influenced by the identity
of the addressee, there was little evidence that the partner they looked at
influenced the content of their speech.
The methods and analysis protocols for all three experiments were
pre-registered at the Open Science Framework (OSF). The master re
pository for this project is available at https://osf.io/89g5b, which in
cludes links to pre-registration documents for each experiment, as well
as data, code, and a software container providing all necessary infra
structure to reproduce our findings.

Overview of Experiments 1-3

Experiment 1

Following work by Brennan and Clark (1996) and Gann and Barr
(2014), the logic of the current investigation was to entrain speakers on
a referential expression E for referent R in training context C, and then to

measure aspects of production in a test context C that required a

different expression, E . For example, in the training context a speaker
might refer to a particular R using expression E, "the small candle", to
distinguish it from another larger candle in the referential array. To
establish and strengthen memory associations, during a training phase,
they would entrain on describing R using E multiple times in context C
(or a context similar to it). To avoid direct repetition across trials, these
entrainment trials were interleaved with entrainment trials for other

referents. Later this same candle would appear in a test context C where

the larger candle was absent. When speakers in C call the referent "the

small candle" (E) instead of simply "the candle" (E ) they do so because
they are relying on memory instead of the information available in the
display. Because we are interested in memory effects, the mis

specification rate in C provides the critical data for our study.
To obtain direct evidence for the ordinary memory view, our study
goes beyond previous studies by varying not only the informational

requirements from C to C , but also perceptual characteristics that could
affect memory retrieval independently of common ground. To the extent
ordinary memory processes influence information selection, speakers

should be increasingly likely to retrieve E in the test context C as a direct

function of the perceptual similarity between C and the training context
C, leading in turn to a higher misspecification rate. This key prediction
of the ordinary memory view falls out of the encoding specificity prin
ciple (Tulving & Thomson, 1973): similarity between encoding and
retrieval contexts facilitates retrieval.
To test this prediction, we used the following basic paradigm. Across
three experiments, speakers and addressees sat at separate computer
screens and engaged in referential communication about shared images.
This made it possible to change features of the speaker's display between
training and test independently of the addressee's display. In the first
two experiments, we varied the similarity in the physical arrangement of
images between training and test. In the context of these experiments,
the position of a referent on the display was communicatively irrelevant,
since speakers believed that listeners viewed a different arrangement of
the same objects. In both of these experiments, in addition to recording
speakers' descriptions, we also measured their implicit memories for the
training displays by tracking eye movements at test. While the implicit
measures suggest retention of training display information, there was
little evidence for any impact of these implicit memories on speakers'
tendency to re-use the descriptions acquired during training.
In the third experiment, speakers spoke to two separate addressees
over a video link, which allowed us to manipulate which partner
appeared on the screen independently from which partner they were
actually speaking to. On certain test trials, speakers viewed a video feed
of a partner to whom they had been speaking during training, although
they were aware that they were in fact speaking to an addressee who
remained off-screen. By independently manipulating who the speaker
saw from who they were actually speaking to, we directly tested the idea

In Experiment 1, speakers referred to capital letters of the alphabet in
displays containing multiple distractor letters varying in size and color
(Fig. 1). Following previous experiments (Brennan & Clark, 1996; Gann
& Barr, 2014), we induced referential overspecification using training
and test trials with different informational requirements. For example,
during training, a speaker might refer to the letter `W' as "the large W" to
distinguish it from a smaller-sized `W' in the same array. In the corre
sponding test trial, the smaller competitor W would be replaced by a foil
letter--a letter with a different identity but that was visually similar to
W (e.g., Y) and that also had the same color and size as the competitor
(as shown in Fig. 1). For all targets in the experiment, size was the only
dimension distinguishing the target from the competitor.
We refer to this condition, where the target (e.g., `W') appeared in
training as part of a contrast including a smaller `W' and as a singleton
on the test trial, as the Contrast-Singleton condition. To the extent
speakers rely on their memory of the training trials, they should over
specify the target at test. Also--and, departing from previous
experiments--we included a Singleton-Contrast condition intended to
induce speakers to underspecify referents. Including this condition made
the task less repetitive and predictable. In this condition, the target letter
appeared as a singleton during training (i.e., with the foil) leading
speakers to entrain on the base noun ("the W"), while at test the same
target would appear as part of a size contrast with a letter of the same
category. If speakers continued using the base description at test, they
would provide too little information for the listener to identify the
referent. Together, these two conditions formed the levels of a single
within-participant factor, Shift Direction. Previous research has claimed
that speakers are more likely to overspecify than underspecify referents,
and even that providing redundant information may sometimes be
helpful for listeners (Nadig & Sedivy, 2002); however, other evidence
suggests that unnecessary pre-nominal modifiers may impair listener's
comprehension (Engelhardt, Demiral, & Ferreira, 2011). Although
testing these claims was not a main goal of our study, it provides a useful
opportunity to clarify some of the issues behind over- versus underspecification.
The critical question in this study was the extent to which the mis
specification of target letters varied as a function of the perceptual
similarity between the training and test trials. The position of letters in
the array was never communicatively relevant, because speakers knew
that the listener viewed the same letters, but in a different, unknown
arrangement. To test the ordinary memory account, we randomly
generated test grids to use as prototypes, which we spatially distorted to
create the training trials (Fig. 2), as in the classic memory study by
Posner and Keele (1968). There were two levels of the within-subject
factor of Distortion: Low Distortion, where the training trials were high
ly spatially similar to the test prototype; and High Distortion, they were
less spatially similar to the prototype. To the extent ordinary memory
processes influence information selection, speakers in the Low Distortion
condition should be more likely to misspecify referents, because the
association between the test display, the referent, and the expression
used at training should be stronger and thus more likely to be retrieved.
We chose spatial arrangement as a memory cue because it is widely
3

K.J. O'Shea et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 117 (2021) 104186

Fig. 1. Example of a test trial display for Experiment 1 from the Contrast-Singleton condition. The target letter (W) is surrounded by a yellow highlight. The foil letter
(Y) appears in the upper left square of the Speaker's view. Note that the Speaker's display was deliberately blurred to make it more difficult to use peripheral vision.
(For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

Fig. 2. Example prototype with six distortion patterns in each of the two Distortion conditions, Experiment 1. In the High Distortion condition, there was relatively
more variability in the letter position (and color) across training patterns; for instance, note that the letter D moves around more and changes color more often. (For
interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

known that people retain episodic traces of spatial configurations, and
that such traces influence aspects of processing; for instance, people are
faster to locate a search target when the display configuration is similar
to a previous trial (Chun & Jiang, 1998). Similarly, when viewing
familiar scenes, people scan them differently, sampling familiar ele
ments less frequently (Ryan, Althoff, Whitlow, & Cohen, 2000). We also
used it as a cue because we could easily measure memory for spatial
configuration using eyetracking. Because the test display is the proto
type of the distortions viewed during training, it should seem more
familiar to speakers in the Low Distortion condition, and we should
expect different scanning patterns relative to the High Distortion condi
tion. To the extent we find these differences without changes in
speakers' misspecification rate, this would suggest that implicit memory
may operate somewhat independently from message planning.

Our main pre-registered prediction was that speakers would be more
likely to misspecify referents in the Low Distortion than in the High
Distortion condition. We also predicted that it would take speakers
longer to produce appropriately specified descriptions in the Low
Distortion condition. We also included two predictions of secondary
importance: (1) that speakers would be more likely to overspecify than
to underspecify targets; and (2) that speakers would gaze at fewer nontarget items prior to speech onset in the Low Distortion condition. In the
end, we opted for a more comprehensive time-series approach to
analyzing the eye data, and so the eye-tracking results for the preregistered hypothesis are reported as part of the online materials.

4

K.J. O'Shea et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 117 (2021) 104186

Method

trials) and 480 trials (9 x 48 training trials plus 48 test trials).
Each sequence for each session was based on a randomly generated
original "prototype" display, which was used as the test trial, with the
training displays generated as distortions of this prototype. The identity,
color, and size of the target letter in each sequence were fixed across all
displays. The identity of the target letter was chosen randomly for each
sequence in each session, with the constraint that the same letter could
not be used as target more than once per session within each block of 24
sequences formed by the Distortion factor. After the selection of the
target for a given sequence, the foil letter was selected from the
remaining set of letters, with the probability of selection inversely pro
portional to its similarity to the target, as derived by norms given in
Simpson, Mousikou, Montoya, and Defior (2013). By biasing the selec
tion toward visually similar letters, we attempted to increase the like
lihood that speakers would fail to detect the difference between a letter
with the same identity (e.g., target `O', competitor `Q'). The random
selection process also meant that each participant would get mostly
distinct letter pairs, which allows us to treat items as a fixed effect in our
analyses (Clark, 1973).
In addition to the target and competitor/foil, there were three sets of
distractor letters scattered among some of the remaining squares in the
grid. The distractor letters were randomly chosen from the set of letters
excluding the target and competitor. Each set in each sequence had
letters of a different color, each randomly chosen (without replacement)
from a palette of ten colors. The first set was of the same color as the
target and competitor, and had either four or five letters. The second set
was of a different color and also had either four or five letters. The third
set was also of a different color and had one or two letters. The sizes of
the distractor letters were randomly chosen from within the range of
64-128 pts.
Next, the letters for each prototype were assigned positions within
the display. For a given sequence, the target and competitor (or foil)
letters always appeared in the same colors and with fixed positions
across all training and test displays. The assignment of the target and
competitor (or foil) positions was random, with the constraint that the
two letters must be at least four spaces apart using a city-block metric.
The positions of the distractor letters were assigned randomly.
The training trials for each sequence were created by distorting the
prototype. Low Distortion displays were created by randomly selecting
either two or three distractor letters from the prototype and moving
them to an adjacent empty space in the grid. Any letter that was "locked
in" (i.e., all surrounding spaces occupied) was never selected to move.
For High Distortion patterns, the positions of all of the distractor letters
were randomly reassigned to any space not occupied by the target or
competitor/foil, and the colors of any two of the distractor sets could be
swapped.
In each speaker display, the target was highlighted with a yellow
surrounding square. There was no such indication on the listener's dis
plays. We wanted to make it more difficult for speakers to identify the
competitor letter using peripheral vision. To this end, we added a slight
Gaussian blur to the speakers' images using the convert command
within the ImageMagick suite of command-line tools (version 8:6.7.7.1,
http://www.imagemagick.org), with the sigma parameter set to 8 and
radius set to 0 (0 x 8).
The listener's displays were created by simply randomizing the po
sitions of the letters in the speaker's grids. Thus, while the locations of
the target and competitor/foil of each sequence were fixed for the
speaker, they varied from trial to trial for the listener. For information
about the sequencing of trials within a block, please see the supple
mentary information provided in our OSF repository.
Of the 48 test trials presented in each experimental session, 24 were
in the Low Distortion condition (with 12 in the Singleton-Contrast condi
tion, and 12 in the Contrast-Singleton condition) and 24 were in the High
Distortion condition (12 in the Singleton-Contrast condition, 12 in the
Contrast-Singleton condition).

A link to the pre-registration for this experiment can be found in the
OSF repository.
Participants
We collected data from a a total of 47 participants, with data from 11
excluded for reasons specified below, leaving 36 participants included in
the analysis. The participants were 24 women and 12 men. The sample
size of 36 was determined in advance, through a power analysis based
on a small pilot study (80% power for the effect observed in the pilot).
All participants were recruited from the University of Glasgow campus
and were either paid  6 or received participation credits.
From our pilot study, we were concerned that some speakers would
opt for a strategy of overdescription--that is, always using a size mod
ifier even when there was not a competitor letter in the display. The
problem with this behavior is that on test trials in the Singleton-Contrast
condition, speakers could simply continue using the modified descrip
tion, which would then spuriously appear to be appropriately specified.
We pre-registered our intent to exclude any participants who inappro
priately used size modifiers on more than half of the final training trials
for each sequence in the Singleton-Contrast level. This resulted in the
exclusion of ten participants. One additional participant was replaced
due to a problem that we did not anticipate in our pre-registration
protocol. This speaker used excessively long descriptions on each trial,
seeming to have misconstrued the task as one of providing fine-grained
description rather than providing sufficient information for the experi
menter to locate the target.
Subjects gave written informed consent before beginning the
experiment and were fully debriefed after the experiment had finished.
Our procedures fully complied with the ethical code of conduct of the
British Psychological Association.
Experimental setup and task
The experiment was interactive with the participant playing the role
of speaker and the experimenter playing the role of the listener. The
speaker and the listener sat in different areas of the testing room and
looked at separate computer monitors throughout the experiment. Both
were seated facing in opposite directions so that they were unable to see
the other's display. In each trial, the speaker was asked to describe a
highlighted target letter, which appeared on their monitor, to the
listener. The listener then identified this letter on his own screen and
selected it using a computer mouse. The target letter appeared on the
speaker's screen within a grid among other distractor letters (Fig. 1).
The speaker was informed that in each trial the listener would have the
same letters on their monitor but that they may be arranged in a
different format compared to the grid that appeared on their screen.
Design
There were two factors in the design, Distortion (Low, High) and Shift
Direction (Singleton-Contrast and Contrast-Singleton), forming a fullfactorial 2 x 2 within-participant design.
Materials
Each display consisted of a five-by-four grid containing uppercase
letters (A-Z) of different font size and color. All letters appeared in up
percase Arial font. The font sizes for targets and competitors/foils were
randomly generated for each trial, with `small' defined as between
64-96 pts and `large' as 32pts higher than the smaller letter in a pair. We
refer to a single `sequence' as the set of training trials and the single test
trial associated with a single target-competitor-foil triad. There were 48
sequences in each experimental session. Displays and target/foil pairs
were randomly generated for each participant. For each sequence, the
number of training trials was randomly chosen from a range of 6-9.
Given these parameters, each experimental session could have con
tained anywhere between 336 trials (6 x 48 training trials plus 48 test
5

K.J. O'Shea et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 117 (2021) 104186

Apparatus
The experimental stimuli were presented on a 19" LCD Dell desktop
computer monitor (4:3 aspect ratio, resolution 1024 pixels wide by 768
pixels high). Participants were seated 45-55 cm away from the monitor.
A microphone was placed above the participant's computer monitor to
record their referential descriptions. Eye movements were recorded
using an Eyelink 1000 (SR Research) remote eye tracker, with a sam
pling rate of 500 Hz.

However, such repaired utterances were not used in the analysis of
speech onset.
For all appropriately-specified descriptions, we counted up all nontarget fixations (with a minimum fixation duration of 100 ms) that
took place prior to speech onset and tested the effect of Distortion on
fixation counts. We predicted a higher rate of pre-onset fixations in the
Low Distortion condition, based on the rationale that speakers would
experience a weaker memory signal for the entrained description and
would thus engage in more checking of context during speech planning.

Procedure
At the start of any given trial, an empty grid appeared on the
speaker's screen, with the yellow square marking the location where the
target would appear. After one second, the preview screen was replaced
with the full display. Audio recording of the speaker's response began
simultaneously with the presentation of the full display. The trial ended
when the listener selected the object designated by the speaker. The
speaker could not see the listener's screen or mouse pointer, and
received no feedback regarding whether or not the listener had selected
the intended referent. If the speaker failed to provide sufficient infor
mation to identify the target, the listener asked the speaker for clarifi
cation (e.g., "Which `W' do you mean?"). Any such clarification
exchanges appeared in the audio recording for the trial and were noted
during later transcription.

Results and discussion
We performed all statistical analyses using the R statistical pro
gramming environment, version 3.3.3 (R Core Team, 2017). Linear
mixed-effects models were estimated using lme4 package version 1.1.21
(Bates, Machler, Bolker, & Walker, 2015). We sought to include the
maximal random effects structure justified by the design (Barr, Levy,
Scheepers, & Tily, 2013), which entails by-subject random intercepts
and by-subject random slopes for both main effects (Distortion and Shift
Direction) and their interaction. It was not necessary to include item as a
random factor since the displays were randomized and specific target/
foil pairs defined separately for each participant (Clark, 1973). We
derived p-values using the t-to-z heuristic, which enabled us to perform
pre-specified one-tailed tests where required. Unless otherwise noted,
tests were two-tailed with  = .05. Shift Direction was coded as ContrastSingleton = - .5, Singleton-Contrast = .5, while Distortion was coded as
High = - .5, Low = .5.

Data analysis
Our analysis focused on three categories of measurements: (1) speech
content; in particular, use of a size modifier (e.g., large/small); (2)
speech onset latency, defined as the time taken to produce the first
content word as measured from the onset of the display; and (3) eye
movements.
For each of the 48 sequences for each speaker, we transcribed and
coded the audio recordings for two trials: (1) the last trial of the training
sequence; and (2) the test trial. The last training trial was needed in
order to provide baseline data for the speech onset latency in the test
trial, and to identify test trials to be excluded (see Results and preregistration document).
For misspecification rate, we coded whether or not a size modifier
was used by the speaker in the test trial (Table 1). Misspecifications were
determined from these codes as follows. In the Singleton-Contrast con
dition, which required a modifier, the codes NO, AS, and AO were
counted as misspecifications. In the Contrast-Singleton condition, where
a modifier was not required, all codes other than NO were counted as
misspecifications.
Onset times of utterances were identified and entered into a data
table in milliseconds. The following criteria were applied when identi
fying utterance onsets:

Misspecification rate
The 36 participants included in the analysis completed a total of
1728 trials, 1677 of which were used in the analysis. The remaining 51
were excluded, 41 because in the last training trial prior to the test trial,
participants did not use a modifier even though it was required, and ten
because poor recording quality made it difficult to transcribe the speech.
The data are shown in Fig. 3.
Table 2 shows strong differences in the distribution of utterance
types across the levels of Shift Direction, but little evidence for any effect
of Distortion. When speakers had entrained on modified nouns and were
tested in a context requiring a bare noun, speakers only overspecified
about 9.3% of the time overall. Speakers were far more likely to mis
specify references when they had entrained on bare nouns and the test
context required a modifier. About 23.1% of the time speakers failed to
include a modifier in the first instance (pre-nominally or postnominally). Typically, if a modifier was included, it was included as a
self-repair ("the W... uh small W").
For the inferential analysis of misspecification rate, we performed
logistic regression using glmer(). The logistic regression model
converged with maximal random effects, but reported singularity in the
variance-covariance matrix. Given doubt as to the interpretation of
singular models (Bates, Kliegl, Vasishth, & Baayen, 2015a), we fit a
second model in which we reduced the random effects structure until the
singularity was removed. This second model included a random inter
cept and random slopes for Shift Direction and the interaction term, but
not for Distortion. We report results from the second model.
There was little evidence to support the main prediction of a main
effect of Distortion. Misspecifications were observed on 16.6% of trials in
the Low Distortion condition, compared to 15.8% in the High Distortion
condition. This difference was not significant (pre-registered one-tailed
test),  = 0.14, SE = 0.16, Wald z = 0.87, p = 0.191. There was also
little evidence for an interaction between Shift Direction and Distortion,
 = - 0.41, SE = 0.37, Wald z = - 1.11, p = 0.267. The effect of Shift
Direction, in contrast, was significant,  = 1.47, SE = 0.32, Wald z =
4.53, p < .001, with a higher rate of misspecification in the SingletonContrast condition (as noted above, 23.1% versus 9.3%). This implies
that speakers were more likely to underspecify targets (e.g., calling the

1. Trials were discarded if the speech was unidentifiable.
2. Any filled pauses or articles were ignored (um, uh, the); speech onset
was identified as the first content word (e.g., adjective or noun), even
if the adjective referred to color rather than size (e.g., for "uh... the
blue W" onset was taken to be at the onset of the word "blue").
3. If speakers corrected themselves after an error (e.g. "pink W...eh
sorry blue W") onset of the correction (i.e. "blue") was recorded.

Table 1
Coding of speech utterance types.
Category

Description

Example

NO
PR
PO
DE
AS
AO

No size modifier
Pre-nominal size modifier
Post-nominal size modifier
Deleted adjective
Addition by self-repair
Addition due to other-repair

"W", "the W", "the red W"
"small W", "large W"
"W that is small", "W, big"
"sm-- uh just the W"
"W... big W"
"W" ("which one"?) "big W"

6

K.J. O'Shea et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 117 (2021) 104186

Fig. 3. Misspecification rate by Distortion Level and Shift Direction. Connected black points are individual participants and red points are grand means. (For
interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
Table 2
Distribution of utterance types across condition, Experiment 1. NO = no misspecification; PR = pre-nominal modifier; PO = post-nominal modifier; DE = deleted
adjective; AS = Addition by self-repair; AO = addition by other-repair. For Contrast-Singleton, PR, PO, DE, AS, and AR were misspecifications; for Singleton-Contrast, it
was NO, DE, AS, and AO.
Shift Direction

Distortion

Contrast-Singleton
Contrast-Singleton
Singleton-Contrast
Singleton-Contrast

Low
High
Low
High

NO

PR

PO

DE

AS

AO

89.4%
92.0%
1.9%
1.7%

6.4%
3.9%
58.4%
58.6%

1.7%
1.5%
18.8%
17.5%

1.9%
2.7%
3.3%
4.1%

0.7%
0.0%
14.3%
14.4%

0.0%
0.0%
3.3%
3.6%

smaller of two Ws `the W') than to overspecify them (e.g., calling the
lone W `the small W').
The above results suggest little evidence for a systematic effect of
Distortion; however, it is possible that participants were sensitive to the
manipulation, despite not showing an overall consistent effect in the
predicted duration. In other words, perhaps there are individual dif
ferences across participants in how memory affects referential descrip
tion, but no consistent overall effect. To test this hypothesis, we ran a
null-hypothesis significance test on the random slope parameter for
Distortion. The estimated random slope of 0.20 logits was not signifi
cantly different from zero,  2 (1) = 0.06, p = 0.814.
How sensitive was our experiment to rejecting a null effect of the
critical Distortion variable? To address this question, we ran a sensitivity
analysis based on the parameter estimates obtained from the linear
mixed-effects analysis. A sensitivity analysis gives insight into the power

of a null-hypothesis test over a range of effect sizes, characterizing the
severity of the test (Mayo, 2018). For this analysis (which was not preregistered), we varied the fixed effect of distortion over six steps on the
logit scale (.1 to.6, in steps of.1). For each of these parameter values, we
simulated 1,000 datasets, deriving all other necessary parameters from
the model estimates. Each dataset was analyzed using a linear-mixed
effects model with a by-subject random intercept and a by-subject
random slope for the main effect of Distortion. We estimated power at
each effect size by calculating the proportion of significant tests (Fig. 4).
The sensitivity analysis suggests that the test of the main effect of
Distortion had: (1) 80% power to detect a significant effect of at least
0.38 logits, corresponding to a effect on misspecification rate of about
2.9% between conditions (e.g., 15.7% in the high distortion condition
versus 18.6% in the low distortion condition); (2) 90% power to detect
an effect of at least 0.45 logits, or a difference of about 4.2% (e.g., 14.9%

Fig. 4. Sensitivity analysis for Experiment 1. The points are the proportion of significant tests at each of the six effect sizes examined; the line is a fit from a logistic
regression model to allow smooth interpolation.
7

K.J. O'Shea et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 117 (2021) 104186

versus 19.1%); and (3) 95% power to detect an effect of at least 0.52
logits, or a difference of about 5.3% (e.g., 14.2% versus 19.5%).

To verify this, we plotted the probability of gazing at various types of
images over time (Fig. 6). There is some suggestion that the memory
manipulation was effective in the predicted direction, but the effect
appears small. The figure indicates that speakers typically started the
trial already fixated on the pre-cued target image and began looking
away about 250 ms after display onset. Speakers appear to look away
from the target and toward the critical image (competitor or foil) slightly
more rapidly in the Low Distortion condition. Although the pattern is
consistent with stronger memory effects in the Low Distortion condition,
the size of the effect is not such to fully rule out the possibility that the
memory manipulation was too weak.
We also carried out our pre-registered test of a difference in the rate
of non-target fixations prior to speech onset for appropriately-specified
descriptions. We predicted a higher fixation rate for the Low Distortion
condition. We fit a generalized linear mixed effects model to the count
data with a log link and Poisson variance function. The model included a
by-subjects random intercept and a random slope for the effect of
Distortion. The covariance matrix for random effects was singular, so we
dropped the random slope and re-fit the model.
No statistically significant difference was detected (two-tailed) be
tween the mean fixation rates of 1.45 (SD = 0.63) for the Low Distortion
condition, and 1.44 (SD = 0.62) for the High Distortion condition,  =
0.01, SE = 0.04, Wald z = 0.15, p = 0.882.

Speech onset latency
Our second main prediction concerned the differential speech onset
latency for appropriately specified descriptions. Our prediction was that
speakers would be less likely to shift from the entrained description to a
more contextually appropriate description in the Low Distortion condi
tion than in the High Distortion condition, due to a stronger retrieval of
the entrained response. For this analysis, in addition to the 51 trials
excluded for reasons detailed above, a further 272 trials were excluded
where speakers misspecified the target, and two more where the speech
onset could not be determined.
The data are shown in Fig. 5. Parameters were estimated using the
lmer() function under maximum likelihood with identity link and
Gaussian variance. The dependent variable was the speech latency for
the test trial minus the speech latency for the final training trial for that
sequence; in other words, the change in speech latency incurred by
abandoning the entrained description. We tested against the null using a
two-tailed test on the Wald z statistic with  = .05.
We once again encountered singularity when fitting the maximal
random-effects model, so we fit a second model with reduced random
effects (the converging non-singular model had random intercepts and
random slopes for Shift Direction). Again, we report the results from the
non-singular model.
The main prediction that speakers would encounter greater difficulty
producing appropriately specified descriptions in the Low Distortion
condition was not supported: there was only a difference of 5 ms be
tween the Low and High conditions, with means of M = 175 ms (SD =
421) and M = 180 ms (SD = 444) respectively, and a non-significant
main effect of Distortion,  = 0.63, SE = 21.48, Wald z = 0.03, p =
0.977. There was also no significant main effect of Shift Direction,  =
- 53.17, SE = 47.94, Wald z = - 1.11, p = 0.267. Finally, the interac
tion was also not significant,  = 57.24,SE = 43.13, Wald z = 1.33,p =
0.184.

Experiment 2
Speakers reliably misspecified referents in Experiment 1, which un
equivocally demonstrates the involvement of memory processes--it
would be unlikely for a speaker to call an average-sized lone W `the small
W'--in the absence of the encoding experience from the training trials
where it appeared with a larger one. However, the non-verbal eye gaze
measurements suggest that the main manipulation may have been too
weak. Experiment 2 included several improvements to increase trainingtest similarity and strengthen the memory associations with the target
descriptions.
It is possible that memory effects in Experiment 1 were obscured by
the high similarity among memory representations across stimulus
items. All of the target items were letters of the alphabet, and the only
type of modification ever required was a size modification (e.g., "the
small W"). This would have created high overlap among memory rep
resentations that could have led to interference during retrieval.
Another potential problem with Experiment 1 is that entraining on
gradable adjectives such as "small" or "large" may have been ineffective
for memory encoding since the meanings of these words are so context
dependent.

Eye gaze
The modest rate of misspecification in the experiment indicates
reliance on memory, but we found no clear evidence for the main pre
diction of stronger retrieval of entrained descriptions in the Low
Distortion condition. This result is ambiguous: it could be taken as sup
port for the idea that speech content is not strongly influenced by or
dinary memory processes, but only if the manipulation of layout was
successful in inducing stronger memory associations in the Low Distor
tion condition.

Fig. 5. Change in speech onset latency from training to test by Shift Direction and Distortion Level. Positive values indicate higher latencies at test; connected black
points are individual participants and red points are grand means. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web
version of this article.)
8

K.J. O'Shea et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 117 (2021) 104186

Fig. 6. Gaze probability by Shift Direction and Distortion. The critical image was a competitor in the Singleton-Contrast condition and a foil in the Contrast-Singleton
condition. The shaded region around each line represents the 95% confidence interval obtained by bootstrapping subjects. (For interpretation of the references to
color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

We addressed these limitations using a variety of everyday objects as
targets and competitors in Experiment 2 (Fig. 7), similar to the type of
stimuli used in Gann and Barr (2014). For each pair, the target was al
ways a very typical member of the category (moreso than the compet
itor), such that when described in a context by itself there would be a
strong tendency to use a basic level term (e.g., the candle, the apple, the
car) (Rosch, Mervis, Gray, Johnson, & Boyes-Braem, 1976). Competitors
were chosen so as to elicit target modifiers that would be very unlikely to
occur in the absence of the target. For the candle example, the
competitor was a highly similar half-melted candle, such that a typical
description of the target would be "the unmelted candle." We chose foil
objects that were visually similar to the competitor but from a different
category of object. For a full list of target-competitor-foil triplets, see the
supplementary materials in the data repository.
The above manipulation also addresses an additional weakness of
Experiment 1, which was the high rate of data loss due to speakers who
opted for a strategy of always including a size modifier, whether or not it
was needed. In this experiment, speakers would need to focus on
different dimensions for each category of object, which was intended to
discourage this strategy and reduce data loss.

A second way we sought to strengthen memory effects was by
removing pre-cuing of the target location. In the previous experiment,
before the target or any other images appeared, speakers were directed
toward the target's location. Since the location itself might operate as a
memory cue, retrieval processes may have already begun prior to
display onset, making their effects less detectable when they were
measured at a later point. To remedy this, in the current experiment, the
highlight indicating the target location occurred simultaneously with
display onset.
Finally, instead of creating low and high distortions of a single spatial
arrangement prototype, we simply manipulated whether the arrange
ment at test was identical to the training arrangement (Congruent con
dition), or a different random arrangement (Incongruent condition),
forming the factor of Congruency (Fig. 7). Note that for the Incongruent
displays, the target location remained fixed over training and test dis
plays, while the locations of all other images (including the competitor/
foil) were randomized.

Fig. 7. Example training and test displays, Experiment 2. The target was indicated to the speaker by a green square surrounding the image.
9

K.J. O'Shea et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 117 (2021) 104186

Method

Occasionally a speaker would use a single subordinate-level term to
distinguish the target from the competitor (e.g., "notes" instead of
"paper money" to distinguish a stack of notes from a pile of coins). In
these instances, we coded the speech as category PR. Cases where
speakers provided disambiguating information after as well as before
the head noun ("the woolen gloves that are red"), were coded as PR, as
long as the information before the head noun seemed sufficient to
disambiguate the target from the competitor. Thus, the choice of PR
versus PO captures whether any adaptations took place up to (and
including) the head noun, or somewhere after (PO).
Unlike Experiment 1, we only coded speech onset times for
appropriately-specified descriptions. Another difference was that we
also established exclusion criteria for items (stimulus sets). We consid
ered the last training trial for each participant on each item on which the
critical object was a foil, and removed items where speakers used a
modifier that would have distinguished the target from the (absent)
competitor. Any items where the rate of modifier use was greater than
50% was removed.

The method of Experiment 2 was similar to Experiment 1, and so we
only describe the differences. A link to the pre-registration for this
experiment can be found in the OSF repository.
Participants
We collected data from a a total of 37 University of Glasgow students
(24 women and 13 men), with data from one participant excluded due to
overdescribing in more than 50% of the last training trials before the
corresponding test trial. All participants were paid  6 or received
participation credits.
Design
There were two factors in the design, Congruency (Congruent versus
Incongruent) and Shift Direction (Singleton-Contrast and ContrastSingleton), forming a full-factorial 2x2 within-participant design. Both
factors were also manipulated within each stimulus set.
Materials
Each display consisted of a five-by-four grid containing various types
of everyday objects (see Fig. 7). The experiment contained 48 "se
quences" of trials, each consisting of a number of training trials followed
by a single test trial (with each sequence being defined as the collection
of training and test trials all associated with a single target/competitor/
foil triplet). Each triplet appeared an equal number of times in all four
conditions of the 2 x 2 design, counterbalanced across participants
using stimulus lists.
For each sequence, the number of training trials was randomly
selected, with a range from 6 to 9. Given these parameters, each
experimental session could have contained between 336 (7 x 48) and
480 (10 x 48) trials. For each stimulus set, 7-10 additional images
unrelated to the target were randomly chosen from a database of stim
ulus images. Images were re-used across trials within a sequence, but not
across different stimulus sets. The displays were checked manually by
two lab assistants to ensure that the unrelated items were sufficiently
dissimilar to the target so as not to influence descriptions of the target.
Target and competitor items were normed beforehand by 68 Native
English speaking volunteers using the web-based survey platform Sur
veyMonkey. A number of items were updated or replaced based on our
norming feedback. Four entirely new stimuli pairs were added to our
original list (for a complete list of the Target and Competitor objects
used please see the supplementary information provided in the OSF
repository).

Results and discussion
Of the 1728 test trial observations we recorded, we removed 252
from seven stimulus items that met our exclusion criterion (see above),
and an additional 176 observations where either speakers had used a
modifier in the last training trial where it was not appropriate (143), or
the response could not be identified from the sound recording (33). This
left 1300 trials remaining for the analyses below.
Misspecification rate
Table 3 shows strong differences in the distribution of utterance
types across the levels of Shift Direction, but little evidence for any effect
of Congruency. When speakers entrained on modified nouns, over
specification at test occurred in about 89.1% of cases (see Fig. 8). When
they entrained on bare nouns, 74.5% of cases failed to include a modifier
in the first instance; typically, if a modifier was included, it was included
as a self-repair.
For the misspecification rate analysis, we performed logistic regres
sion using glmer(). The logistic regression model of misspecification
rate converged with maximal random effects, but reported singularity in
the variance-covariance matrices. We fit a second model in which we
reduced the random effects structure until the singularity was removed.
The model that converged included by-subject and by-item random in
tercepts; by-subject random slopes for Shift Direction, Congruency, and
their interaction; and by-item random slopes for Shift Direction and
Congruency but not for the interaction. All covariance parameters were
constrained to zero. We report the results from the second model.
There was some evidence for the main prediction: misspecifications
were observed on 84.5% of trials in the Congruent condition, compared
to 80.1% in the Incongruent condition, a significant main effect of Con
gruency, (pre-registered one-tailed test),  = 0.42,SE = 0.22, Wald z =
1.88, p = 0.030. There was little evidence for an interaction between
Shift Direction and Congruency,  = - 0.10, SE = 0.41, Wald z = - 0.25,
p = 0.806. The effect of Shift Direction, in contrast, was significant,  =
- 1.71, SE = 0.38, Wald z = - 4.56, p < .001, with higher rates of
misspecification in the Contrast-Singleton case (as mentioned above,
89.1% versus 74.5%). In other words, in this experiment, speakers were
more likely to overspecify than underspecify.
Following up on this significant effect of Congruency, we also
examined whether there were significant individual differences across
participants in the magnitude of the effect by testing the significance of
the corresponding random slope (this analysis was not pre-registered).
However, we failed to detect any differences across subjects or items.
The estimated by-subject random slope of 0.26 was not significantly
different from zero,  2 (1) = 0.09, p = 0.770. The test of the by-item
random slope (estimate = 0.42) was also not significant,  2 (1) = 0.39,

Apparatus
The apparatus was identical to Experiment 1, with the exception that
the eyetracking sampling rate for all participants was set to 250 Hz.
Procedure
The procedure was identical to the previous experiment, with the
exception that on each trial, the cue for the target location appeared
simultaneously with the rest of the display. Additionally, although
speakers and listeners had different arrangements of each set of images
within the grid, the listener's arrangement was held constant within
each sequence to facilitate easier identification of the target. Our
rationale was that with predictable target locations, listeners would be
faster to identify targets during training, which might lead the speaker to
entrain more strongly on the referential precedent.
Data analysis
The measurements and predictions were identical to Experiment 1,
with the difference that all mixed-effects models also included by-item
random intercepts and slopes, since items (sets of target/competitor/
foil/unrelated images) repeated across participants and were likely to
induce different patterns of modification.
10

K.J. O'Shea et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 117 (2021) 104186

Table 3
Distribution of utterance types across condition, Experiment 2. NO = no misspecification; PR = pre-nominal modifier; PO = post-nominal modifier; DE = deleted
adjective; AS = Addition by self-repair; AO = addition by other-repair. For Contrast-Singleton, PR, PO, DE, AS, and AR were misspecifications; for Singleton-Contrast, it
was NO, DE, AS, and AO.
Shift Direction

Congruency

NO

PR

PO

DE

AS

AO

Contrast-Singleton
Contrast-Singleton
Singleton-Contrast
Singleton-Contrast

Congruent
Incongruent
Congruent
Incongruent

9.5%
12.4%
3.4%
2.7%

76.4%
75.4%
12.4%
21.4%

12.1%
10.7%
8.4%
6.1%

1.7%
1.2%
0.3%
1.0%

0.3%
0.3%
22.5%
21.1%

0.0%
0.0%
53.0%
47.6%

Fig. 8. Misspecification rate by Congruency and Shift Direction. Connected black points are individual participants and red points are grand means. (For inter
pretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

p = 0.533.
We also performed a sensitivity analysis for the test of the main effect
of Congruency, following the same procedure described for Experiment
1, with the difference that the effect size range was from.1 to.7 logits.
(This analysis was also not pre-registered.) Results are shown in Fig. 9.
The sensitivity analysis suggests our test of the main effect of Congruency
had: (1) 80% power to detect an effect of at least 0.47 logits, corre
sponding to an effect on misspecification rate of about 4.6% between
conditions (e.g., 77.0% in the incongruent condition versus 81.6% in the
congruent condition); (2) 90% power to detect an effect of at least 0.57
logits, or a difference of about 5.1% (e.g., 77.2% versus 82.3%); and (3)
95% power to detect an effect of at least 0.65 logits, or a difference of
about 5.4% (e.g., 77.2% versus 82.6%).

Speech onset latency
As in the previous experiment, the prediction was that speakers
would have more difficulty shifting to an appropriately specified test
description when memory associations were stronger (i.e., in the
Congruent condition). The means in the Congruent and Incongruent con
ditions were inconsistent with this prediction, M = 2277 ms (SD = 975)
and M = 2481 ms (SD = 981) respectively. However, the very high rate
of misspecification in the current experiment (82.3%) left very few
appropriately-specified observations for analysis (only 230). Given the
very small number of remaining observations, we opted to forgo any
further statistical analysis. Because we only had onset data for a small
minority of observations, we also did not pursue our pre-registered
analysis of the rate of pre-onset fixations across congruency conditions.

Fig. 9. Sensitivity analysis for Experiment 2. The points are the proportion of significant tests at each of the six effect sizes examined; the line is a fit from a logistic
regression model to allow smooth interpolation.
11

K.J. O'Shea et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 117 (2021) 104186

Eye gaze
In contrast to Experiment 1, a plot of the probability of eye gaze on
the various regions (Fig. 10) indicates unequivocal memory effects:
when the display arrangement was congruent at test, speakers looked
away from the target and toward the critical object much more rapidly.
Unlike the previous experiment, the main prediction did receive
some statistical support: speakers relied on remembered descriptions
significantly more often when the arrangement of the test display was
more similar to the arrangement at training. However, the effect of
similarity was small, corresponding to about a 4.5% difference. In
contrast, the differences in eye movements were quite strong: for
instance, the rate of fixating on the target 500 ms after onset was about
50% in the Incongruent condition versus 30% in the Congruent condition.
So although perceptual aspects of the conversational situation are
clearly stored and affect processing, these aspects may only have very
weak effects on speech content.
One notable difference from Experiment 1 was the very high overall
misspecification rate, which was about 82.3%, compared to about
16.2% in Experiment 1. What might account for this difference? This
might be attributable to semantic/pragmatic differences between size
modifiers and other types of modifiers. Perhaps because size modifiers
have more relational semantics than other types of modifiers (Grodner &
Sedivy, 2011), they are used in a more context-specific manner. Another
possibility is that the constant use of size modification in Experiment 1
led speakers to pay more attention overall to the presence or absence of a
size contrast in any given display.

something that speakers need to regularly attend to for their references
to succeed. The perceptual information associated with conversational
partners provides a far more important and ecologically relevant set of
cues.
When language users interact, particularly in a face-to-face setting, it
would seem likely that they would develop links between the content of
the dialogue and perceptual features of their interactions, such as how
their interlocutors look and sound. The ordinary memory view assumes
that these perceptual features can drive a resonance process that makes
relevant information from past conversations readily accessible (Horton
& Gerrig, 2005). We designed Experiment 3 around this key assumption.
Sighted language users in Western cultures generally look at their
addressees while communicating. As a result, the perceptual experience
of seeing one's partner is confounded with the speaker's mental repre
sentation of that person's conversational role as an addressee. For the
purpose of our study, it was necessary to deconfound these two streams
of information to be able to measure memory effects independently from
effects about the speaker's beliefs their common ground with the
addressee. We did this by having speakers communicate with two
different partners over independent video and audio links. Both of the
partners were together, but in a separate room from the speaker. The
two partners (who were experimenters) alternated in their role as
addressee. The video link showed one of the two partners at a time. We
manipulated which partner appeared on the speaker's screen indepen
dently from which partner had access to the audio link relaying the
speaker's live speech. This setup makes it possible for speakers to be
looking at one partner who cannot hear them while addressing another,
unseen partner.
During training phases, speakers developed memory associations
between targets and expressions while addressing and viewing one of
two partners. Both partners wore headphones; during training, the onscreen partner could hear and respond to descriptions via audio link,
while the off-screen partner wore a blindfold and heard masking noise to
limit their access to the exchange. The images that the speaker
conversed about appeared superimposed over the image of the partner

Experiment 3
In Experiments 1 and 2, we used spatial arrangement as a memory
cue. While spatial cues allow convenient measurement of implicit as
pects of memory processes through eyetracking, they have the disad
vantage of potentially low ecological relevance for communication.
Although the eye movement data showed that speakers did indeed store
information about spatial configuration, spatial information is not

Fig. 10. Gaze probability by Shift Direction and Congruency. The critical image was a competitor in the Singleton-Contrast condition and a foil in the ContrastSingleton condition. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
12

K.J. O'Shea et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 117 (2021) 104186

(see Fig. 11). The objects depicted in the images were similar to the ones
we used in Experiment 2 and, as in that experiment, speakers also
entrained on either modified or unmodified descriptions. Note that
during training, the visible partner and the addressee were one and the
same.
As in the previous experiment, test trials differed from training trials
in the identity of a critical object: in the Singleton-Contrast condition, the
foil from training became a competitor at test (potentially inducing
underspecification of the target), while in the Contrast-Singleton condi
tion, the competitor at training became a foil at test (potentially
inducing overspecification of the target). We also independently
manipulated the congruence of the test situation with the training sit
uation along two separate dimensions: Addressee (same or different) and
Visible Partner (same or different; see Fig. 12). The critical question was
whether speakers would be more likely to misspecify referents at test
when the visible partner was the same as the one they had seen (and
spoken to) during training, compared to when it was the partner they
had not spoken to. If partners serve as memory cues, speakers should be
more likely to misspecify referents at test when they are looking at the
partner they spoke to during training (regardless of whether they are
currently addressing this partner). To maximize power, we preregistered a one-tailed test of this prediction (greater misspecification
in the Visible Partner: Same condition). Additionally, the inclusion of the
Addressee factor makes it possible to test the extent to which mis
specified descriptions are the result of speakers using common
ground--that is, of them preferring to continue using an established
precedent because it is part of their common ground with the addressee
(Brennan & Clark, 1996). Under this view, speakers should misspecify
more often when they are speaking to the same addressee, regardless of
which partner is visible.
Dissociating visibility from participant roles required a complex
setup, raising the possibility of speakers becoming confused about who
could and could not hear them at any given point in time. We took
several steps to ensure speakers were clear about what was going on.
First, the identity of the visible partner and addressee remained fixed
over a block of trials, rather than changing with each trial. Before any
such block began, speakers were presented with a notification of who
should be the addressee for that block. Speakers were made responsible
for selecting that person as the addressee by manipulating a crossfader
knob on an audio mixer. Thus, speakers had to attend to and act on the
information about the addressee's identity. Second, during a warm-up
phase of the experiment, speakers were given the opportunity to play
the role of both addressee and non-addressee while one of the listeners
took the role of the speaker. This made it clear to participants that the
non-addressed partner would lack knowledge of the established refer
ential precedents.

Finally, we included an additional set of unconventional targets
(Fig. 13) which served primarily as a check on whether speakers were
attending to the identity of the addressee. These unconventional targets
were abstract shapes that could only be identified using structural de
scriptions. We included these because we have previously found that
these materials elicited strong effects of common ground (Gann & Barr,
2014). Speakers gradually shorten their descriptions of unconventional
objects when they refer to them repeatedly with the same addressee
(Clark & Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986). Most importantly, when they describe old
referents to new addressees who lack knowledge of the previous de
scriptions, they tend to lengthen their descriptions. To a large extent,
this lengthening appears to be the result of incrementally elaborating
upon the informationally-reduced descriptions arrived at with the old
partner, rather than planning entirely new descriptions (Gann & Barr,
2014). Given this prior research, we expected speakers to produce
longer descriptions for these targets when speaking to new addressees.
Method
A link to the pre-registration for this experiment can be found in the
OSF repository.
Participants
The final dataset included data from a total of 40 University of
Glasgow students (31 women and 9 men), all of whom identified
themselves as native English speakers. Data from one additional
participant was replaced due to them continuously failing to provide
informationally adequate descriptions during training (54.2% mis
specifications on the last training trial before test). All participants were
paid  6 or received participation credits.
Design
The study had a 2 x 2 x 2 design, with factors Shift Direction
(Singleton-Contrast, Contrast-Singleton), Addressee (Same, Different), and
Visible Partner (Same, Different). The levels of all factors were adminis
tered within participants and within stimulus items.
Experimental setup and task
As in the previous experiments, speakers were to describe the target
object on each trial so that an addressee could identify it. The addressee
could be one of two partners (a male or female experimenter), but only
one of them could actually hear the description. For the speaker, each
display consisted of nine images of various objects displayed around the
webcam image of the visible partner (see Fig. 11). Only one of the two
partners was on-screen at a given time. The partners saw only a 3 x 3
grid of objects, and indicated their choice by pressing a key on a number

Fig. 11. Example displays for the speaker and the confederate partner, Experiment 3. (Note that the red arrow, which indicates the location of the competitor, is
included for expository convenience, but did not appear on the speaker's display.) (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is
referred to the web version of this article.)
13

K.J. O'Shea et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 117 (2021) 104186

Fig. 12. Design of Experiment 3, showing
one training and one test trial for an example
item in the Contrast-Singleton condition. The
four versions of the test trial correspond to
all four conditions obtained by factorially
combining Visible Partner and Addressee.
The red arrow indicates the competitor/foil
object for expository purposes, and was not
shown on the speaker's display. The loud
speaker icon indicates which partner was the
addressee (i.e., could hear the speech) on
that trial in that condition. (For interpreta
tion of the references to color in this figure
legend, the reader is referred to the web
version of this article.)

Fig. 13. Unconventional targets used in Experiment 3.

pad.
There were 48 main sets of stimuli, presented over 12 blocks of trials,
with each block further subdivided into training and test phases. Each
block was in one of the four conditions obtained by factorially

combining the levels of Addressee (Same, Different) and Visible Partner
(Same, Different), with the presentation order of the blocks determined
randomly for each participant. Two of the four stimulus sets in each
block appeared in the Singleton-Contrast condition, while the other two
14

K.J. O'Shea et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 117 (2021) 104186

appeared in the Contrast-Singleton condition. The assignment of stimulus
sets to condition was counterbalanced using eight presentation lists,
with five participants randomly assigned to each list, such that each set
appeared in all eight conditions of the design across participants.

The instruction sheet also contained images that provided an
example of a single trial (see OSF repository for more details).
The two partners were set up in an adjoining room to the speaker and
faced a single computer monitor. The partners were seated in rolling
chairs, which allowed them to easily slide in front of or away from the
camera, as required. The floor of the lab room was marked with tape to
indicate where chairs needed to be positioned to be on or off camera. To
minimize confusion for the speaker, each partner wore a colored tag that
corresponded to the color of a sticker placed at each end of the cross
fading slider.
Before the experiment began participants took part in a practice
session that consisted of twelve training trials and four test trials. This
enabled the participant to familiarize themselves with their role as
speaker, as well as to experience the task from the perspective of the
partner. In this manner, the participant was made aware that the part
ners saw the images in an entirely different spatial arrangement (Fig. 11)
and that only one partner at a time would be able to hear the de
scriptions. After practice ended, the main part of the experiment began.
On each trial, audio recording began simultaneously with the pre
sentation of the display. The target object in each display was high
lighted for the speaker by a green square. The trial ended when the
addressee selected an object on the number pad. The speaker received
no feedback regarding which picture the addressee selected. If the
speaker failed to provide sufficient information to identify the target, the
addressee would ask for clarification. Any such clarification exchanges
appeared in the audio recording for the trial and were noted during later
transcription.
Before each block of training trials, an on-screen notice informed the
speaker which partner would appear on-screen and which partner would
be the addressee. In the notice, the partners were identified by both
color (the yellow and the orange partner) and first name. Partners wore
different color name tags that matched the color of two stickers placed
on either end of the crossfader on the audio mixer.
The on-screen notice before each training phase also indicated that
the off-screen partner was to put on the blindfold. Based on the notice,
the speaker slid the crossfader to the appropriate color to select the next
addressee. Each of the two partners served as the training phase
addressee for six of the twelve blocks. The partner who was not selected
as addressee during training was always off-screen wearing a blindfold,
and could only hear white noise through their headphones.
Just prior to the test phase another on-screen notice appeared indi
cating that the blindfold was to be removed, and designated the identity
of the on-screen partner as well as the addressee. Again, the participant
was responsible for sliding the crossfader to the appropriate color. So
that the delay between training and test would not be confounded with
condition, the notice appeared for a minimum of eighteen seconds
before advancing to the next phase, which provided more than sufficient
time for the partners to move into position and for the speaker to select
the specified addressee.

Apparatus
The experimental stimuli were presented on a 19 LCD Dell desktop
computer monitor (4:3 aspect ratio, resolution 1024 x 768 pixels). A
microphone was placed above the participant's computer monitor to
record their descriptions of the target object for each trial. Speakers
controlled the crossfader on a Numark two input stereo mixer with a
crossfading slider. One input had the white noise coming in on the left
channel and live audio from the microphone on the right channel; the
other input had the opposite configuration. The left output channel was
split and fed from the mixer to one set of headphones, while the right
output channel was split and fed to the other set of headphones. With
this configuration, by sliding the crossfader all the way to the left, one
participant would hear speech and the other would hear the white noise;
sliding it all the way to the right would create the opposite situation. The
two ends of the crossfader were colored so as to identify which partner
would be the addressee by sliding the knob in that direction.
Video from the room with the two partners was recorded using a
Logitech Pro 9000 webcam and transmitted to the speaker's display.
Materials
We re-used the stimuli from Experiment 2, except we replaced nine
of the target/competitor/foil triplets with new sets, including the seven
sets that were excluded from Experiment 2 due to high rates of mis
specification during training. See the online repository for a list of the 48
target and competitor pairs. A third of the targets were randomly
assigned to four training repetitions, a third to five training repetitions,
and a third to six, forming a total of 240 training trials across all blocks
for each session, and 48 test trials.
Each of the twelve blocks included two additional sets of stimuli. One
of these sets consisted of filler items that we included so that a change
from training to test (with a possible change of visible partner and/or
addressee) did not always require a change in the description of the
targets (i.e., there was no substitution of the foil/competitor from
training to test). There were twelve of these sets, one for each block, half
of which were constructed so that reference to the target required a
modifier, and the other half so that it required no modification. The
targets were repeated three times during training and once at test,
forming a total of 48 trials for each session.
The other set of stimuli included in each block consisted of the un
conventional targets (as described above). In each block, one uncon
ventional target was repeated three times during training, and once at
test, forming 48 additional trials for each session.
In sum, there were 384 trials in total for each experimental session:
240 training trials (4 items repeated 4-6 times in each block), 48 test
trials (4 items per block), 48 fillers with targets modeled after the main
stimulus items (1 item per block repeated four times), and 48 items with
unconventional targets (1 item per block repeated four times).

Data analysis
We transcribed and coded each speaker's spoken responses as
described in Experiment 2. Each speaker had 96 trials for coding/tran
scription: the 48 test trials, and the final training trial for each stimulus
item prior to the test trial. As with the previous experiments, the training
trials were coded to verify that speakers were not already misspecifying
the referent during training. We also transcribed each speaker's
description of the twelve unconventional targets at test, and counted the
number of words used in the description.
The misspecification variable was analyzed using linear mixedeffects regression, estimated with the glmer() function from lme4,
with a logit link function and binomial variance. For the random effects
structure, we included by-subject and by-item intercepts and also sought
to include by-subject and by-item random slopes for all main effects and
interactions.
Word count for unconventional targets was analyzed using linear

Procedure
Upon arrival each participant was given an instruction sheet detail
ing the task and their role during the experiment. The instructions
stated:
You will play the role of the "Director" and will verbally name the
TARGET item to one of two Matchers who will sit in a separate room
from you. The figures below show the two people who will be
listening to your descriptions. They will interact with you through a
live webcam video. Only one Matcher will be able to hear your
description at a time. The Matcher who appears on the screen may
not be the person listening to your description.

15

K.J. O'Shea et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 117 (2021) 104186

mixed-effects regression, estimated with glmer() with a log link
function and Poisson variance. The maximal model structure we sought
to fit included by-subject and by-item random slopes for Visible Partner,
Addressee, and their interaction.

Table 4
Distribution of utterance types in the Contrast-Singleton condition, Experiment
3. NO = no misspecification; PR = pre-nominal modifier; PO = post-nominal
modifier; DE = deleted adjective; AS = Addition by self-repair; AO = addition by
other-repair. Categories PR, PO, DE, AS, and AR were counted as
misspecifications.

Results and discussion
We applied the same exclusion criteria for participants and stimuli in
Experiment 3 as we did in Experiment 2. Based on these criteria one
participant was replaced (as noted in Participants) and two of the 48
stimulus sets were removed prior to analysis, leaving 1840 total trials.
Of these, an additional 131 were removed, 128 of which because the
speaker did not appropriately specify the target on the final training
trial, and three because the speech could not be determined due to poor
recording quality.

Visible
Partner

Addressee

Same
Same
Different
Different

Same
Different
Same
Different

NO

PR

PO

DE

AS

AO

41.2%
41.4%
34.1%
33.2%

48.9%
45.5%
50.9%
51.4%

9.0%
8.6%
11.4%
13.6%

0.0%
3.2%
2.7%
1.8%

0.9%
1.4%
0.9%
0.0%

0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%

(Because this experiment had three factors and thus more parameters
than the previous experiments, we present all remaining parameter es
timates in Table 6 instead of in the main text.)
There was little evidence for the prediction that misspecification
would be higher when the training partner was the partner who was
visible at test. One question is whether participants were sensitive at all
to the visible partner manipulation; perhaps speakers were sensitive, but
used the information in different ways--some subjects showing greater
misspecification when the visible partner matched, others showing
greater misspecification when it mismatched--with these individual
differences yielding no overall systematic effect. To test this, we first
performed an significance test of the by-subject random slope for Visible
Partner (this test was not part of pre-registration plan). The estimated
by-subject random slope of 0.35 was not significantly different from
zero,  2 (1) = 1.24, p = 0.265. (We did not test the significance of the
by-item random slope because the model estimated this parameter to be
zero.)
We also performed a sensitivity analysis for the test of the main effect
of Visible Partner, following the same procedure described for Experi
ment 1, with the difference that the effect size range was from.1 to.5
logits. (This analysis was also not pre-registered.) Results are shown in
Fig. 15. The sensitivity analysis suggests the test of Visible Partner had:
(1) 80% power to detect an effect of at least 0.3 logits, corresponding to
a difference in misspecification rate of about 5.1% between conditions

Misspecification rate
The logistic regression model of misspecification rate did not
converge with maximal random effects. We fit a second model in which
we reduced the random effects structure until convergence was reached
and no singularity message was encountered. The reduced model con
tained by-subject random intercepts, by-subject random slopes for
Visible Partner, the Visible Partner-by-Addressee interaction, and the three
way interaction, with covariances constrained to zero; by-item random
intercepts, by-item random slopes for Shift Direction, Shift Direction-byVisible Partner interaction, the three way interaction, and with co
variances also constrained to zero.
The key prediction concerned whether the misspecification rate was
higher when the visible partner was the same at test as at training. There
was little evidence to support this prediction (Fig. 14). Misspecifications
were observed on 57.7% of trials where the visible partner was the
training partner, compared to 63.0% where the visible partner was the
other partner (see Table 4 and Table 5 for the distribution of utterance
types across each condition). This difference was not significant (preregistered one-tailed test),  = - 0.32,SE = 0.12, Wald z = - 2.66,p =
0.996, and was in fact showing a numerical trend in the opposite di
rection from what was predicted. No other effects were significant.

Fig. 14. Misspecification rate by Visible Partner, Addressee, and Shift Direction. Connected black points are individual participants and red points are grand means.
(For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
16

K.J. O'Shea et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 117 (2021) 104186

Table 5
Distribution of utterance types in Singleton-Contrast condition, Experiment 3. NO = no misspecification; PR = pre-nominal modifier; PO = post-nominal modifier; DE
= deleted adjective; AS = Addition by self-repair; AO = addition by other-repair. Categories NO, DE, AS, and AO were counted as misspecifications.
Visible Partner

Addressee

Same
Same
Different
Different

Same
Different
Same
Different

NO

PR

PO

DE

AS

AO

2.0%
3.3%
2.5%
2.4%

28.2%
23.0%
22.5%
23.2%

15.8%
19.6%
17.5%
17.5%

0.0%
0.5%
0.0%
0.0%

21.8%
20.6%
18.0%
18.5%

32.2%
33.0%
39.5%
38.4%

(e.g., 58.6% in the different partner versus 63.7% in the same partner
condition); (2) 90% power to detect an effect of at least 0.35 logits, or a
difference in response rate of 6.7% (e.g., 57.5% versus 64.2%); and (3)
95% power to detect an effect of at least 0.41 logits, or a difference in
response rate of 6.5% (e.g., 58.1% versus 64.6%).

Table 6
Parameter estimates, standard errors, test statistics and p-values for analysis of
misspecification rate (see main text for Visible Partner (VP) results, which was a
pre-registered one-tailed test).
effect
Intercept
Shift Direction (SD)
Addressee (A)
SD:VP
SD:A
VP:A
SD:VP:A

beta

SE

Wald z

p

0.56
- 0.18
- 0.04
0.17
0.12
0.02
- 0.13

0.18
0.17
0.11
0.23
0.22
0.24
0.50

3.09
- 1.07
- 0.33
0.74
0.53
0.07
- 0.25

0.002
0.287
0.739
0.461
0.593
0.941
0.801

Word count for unconventional targets
For the model of word count, we fit a generalized linear mixedeffects model with Poisson distribution function and log link. The
maximal model returned a singularity message, and so we fit a reduced
model with a by-subject random intercepts, by-subject random slopes
for Visible Partner, Addressee, and the Visible Partner-by-Addressee inter
action, with covariances constrained to zero; by-item random intercepts,
by-item random slopes for Addressee, and covariances constrained to
zero. The data are shown in Fig. 16.
There was a significant effect of Addressee on word count, with longer

Fig. 15. Sensitivity analysis for Experiment 3. The points are the proportion of significant tests at each of the six effect sizes examined; the line is a fit from a logistic
regression model to allow smooth interpolation.

Fig. 16. Word count for unconventional referent descriptions by Visible Partner and Addressee. Connected black points are individual participants and red points are
grand means. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
17

K.J. O'Shea et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 117 (2021) 104186

descriptions given when the partner at test was different from the
training partner, M = 8.5 (SD = 5.5), compared to descriptions given to
the same partner, M = 7.5 (SD = 4.7),  = - 0.26,SE = 0.06, Wald z =
- 4.48, p < .001.
There was little evidence for any effect of Visible Partner on word
count; for descriptions in the Different Partner condition, M = 7.9 (SD =
5.4), versus descriptions in the Same Partner condition, M = 8.1 (SD =
4.9),  = - 0.01, SE = 0.03, Wald z = - 0.30, p = 0.762.
Finally, there was little evidence for a Visible Partner-by-Addressee
interaction. When the visible partner was the same as in training,
speakers produced descriptions that were on average 0.9 words longer
for the new addressee; this effect was not significantly different from the
case where the visible partner was different from the training partner,
where speakers produced descriptions that were on average 1.2 words
longer for the new addressee,  = 0.01,SE = 0.08, Wald z = 0.19,p =
0.850.

2003), it was eventually detected in later experiments that used more
sensitive measures and larger samples (Brown-Schmidt, 2009). A metaanalysis suggested these effects are likely to exist, but are small and
fleeting (Kronmuller & Barr, 2015) especially when compared to the
very large and reliable partner-independent effects. In short, abstract
symbolic memory representations, such as the association between a
referent and a referring expression, appear to have strong impacts on
language processing, but the role of more detailed episodic representa
tions appears marginal at best. That said, our findings for production are
best viewed as limiting the explanatory scope of ordinary memory
models, rather than as an overall rejection of this view. Our studies have
only looked only at short-term memories formed within the confines of
the laboratory, and perhaps repetition across a longer time frame could
produce larger effects.
Another consideration is that across all experiments, we used ex
perimenters as listeners rather than actual participants. One possibility
is that because our experimenters were practiced at the task, back-andforth interaction was more limited than it would be with uninformed
listeners, and perhaps speakers attended less to the referring context
than they would otherwise, thus forming impoverished representations.
Against this interpretation, we note that we did find strong partner ef
fects in Experiment 3 with the unconventional targets, which demon
strates that speakers were treating the two listeners as having different
knowledge and did in fact encode information about the context.
Furthermore, it could be argued that using real listeners could lead to
weaker encoding of context, since they would be likely to produce more
variable responses, respond with greater delay, and their relative unfa
miliarity and uncertainty could distract attention from the displays onto
the interaction itself.
Our results do not entirely reject the claim of the ordinary memory
view that memory processes can serve as a proxy for common ground in
message generation; rather, they help set boundary conditions for this
claim. As already noted, speakers' memory representations were only
established through repetition within the context of a single conversa
tion with a single partner, and so our findings may not generalize to
representations developed through repetition across multiple conver
sations taking place over longer time intervals. Still, retaining and using
information from the current conversation is a component of common
ground, embodied in the linguistic co-presence heuristic cited in the
Introduction. Our results therefore suggest it is unlikely that ordinary
memory processes can effectively substitute for this heuristic, but they
leave the physical co-presence and community membership heuristics un
touched. Interestingly, even using an ecologically valid memory
cue--the image of the training partner (Experiment 3)--did not appear
to strengthen effects relative to the more abstract cues used in the first
two experiments.
To avoid a possible misunderstanding of our position, we do not
intend to claim that ordinary memory processes are the sole determinant
of information availability during message generation. There are likely
to be many perceptual or social-cognitive factors operating outside of
these processes that are worthy of further study. Indeed, our Experiment
3 provided evidence that speakers used common ground, lengthening
their descriptions of old referents to provide more information when
speaking to a partner with whom previous descriptions had not been
shared, replicating both Gann and Barr (2014) and Ahn and BrownSchmidt (2020). Also like Gann and Barr (2014), we found that
speakers showed partner effects when describing abstract referents but
not when using modifiers. What might explain this apparent conflict?
Whereas modified descriptions such as "the big W" or "the unmelted
candle" are likely to be mostly pre-planned, longer descriptions that
speakers produce for abstract objects (e.g., "it looks like three snailshapes stacked on top of each other") afford opportunities for incre
mental construction, such that their content may be shaped by self- and
other-monitoring processes. Supporting this view, Gann and Barr (2014)
observed that despite producing longer descriptions, speakers' onset
latencies were no greater when they spoke to new addressees, which

General discussion
Over three experiments, we sought to test whether ordinary memory
processes--as embodied in the encoding specificity principle (Tulving &
Thomson, 1973)--influence the selection of information in the genera
tion of referential descriptions. The basic logic of the experiments was to
have speakers entrain on particular descriptions for referents in specific
contexts, and then present the same referents in a context with different
informational requirements but varying in similarity to the training
context. The key prediction was that speakers' tendency to use the (no
longer appropriate) entrained-upon description would vary as a function
of the similarity between the training and test contexts. Support for this
prediction was weak and inconsistent: no statistically reliable effect in
Experiment 1, with a difference in means of less than 1%; a statistically
significant congruency effect in Experiment 2 (pre-registered one-tailed
test, p = 0.030), but with a difference of less than 5%; and finally, a
numerical difference of 5% in Experiment 3, but in the wrong direction.
All experiments were pre-registered and attained 80% power to reject a
raw effect of around.4 logits, corresponding to a difference in mis
specification rate of about 5%.
Despite limited overall support for the main prediction that trainingtest similarity would modulate misspecification rates, all three experi
ments show strong memory effects, inasmuch as speakers consistently
misspecified targets across all three experiments: 16% in Experiment 1,
82% in Experiment 2, and 60% in Experiment 3. These overall rates
indicate that speakers did retain information from training episodes,
since the specific misspecifications that took place (e.g., calling a candle
`the unmelted candle') would be extremely unlikely to occur in the
absence of the training experiences; moreover, the eye data from
Experiment 2 indicated strong and detailed memory for the training
display configurations, although the impact on speech was limited.
Finally, these mostly null effects of detailed memory representations are
contrasted with positive evidence for a common ground effect in
Experiment 3, where speakers lengthened descriptions of unconven
tional referents for new addressees. Taken together, these findings
support the idea that speakers do maintain detailed representations
about past referring episodes, but these representations have little role
in the message generation process, even when the representations are
related to the identity of an interacting conversational partner. Instead,
it appears that much of message generation is driven by coarse-grained
memory representations that do not contain much more information
than the identity of the target referent and the label given to it on pre
vious occasions.
It is illustrative to consider these findings in relation to recent find
ings from comprehension. Episodic effects on comprehension have been
studied in a similar paradigm, in terms of whether reference resolution is
facilitated when listeners hear expressions repeated in the voice of the
speaker who established the precedent. Although early experiments
failed to find such facilitation (Barr & Keysar, 2002; Metzing & Brennan,
18

K.J. O'Shea et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 117 (2021) 104186

indicates that the extra content was not part of the original plan. Also,
there was evidence that the length of speakers' utterances could be
predicted by hesitation behaviors emitted by the addressee, supporting
the idea that the extra content resulted from monitoring of the partner.
The question of how speakers select information in language pro
duction remains one of the least studied, and thus, most mysterious
aspects of language production. One point that scholars can agree on is
that much of what speakers choose to say seems to be driven in large part
by information availability, but the concept of `availability' remains a
poor explanatory construct. While ordinary memory processes are
inevitably involved, what they deliver up to production processes are
largely abstract symbolic representations, which makes it unlikely that
these processes serve as an effective proxy for common ground in
everyday conversation.

Clark, H. H., & Wilkes-Gibbs, D. (1986). Referring as a collaborative process. Cognition,
22, 1-39.
Dell, G. S., & Brown, P. M. (1991). Mechanisms for listener-adaptation in language
production: Limiting the role of the model of the listener. Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum.
Engelhardt, P. E., Demiral, B., & Ferreira, F. (2011). Over-specified referring expressions
impair comprehension: An ERP study. Brain and Cognition, 77, 304-314.
Ferreira, V. S., & Dell, G. S. (2000). Effect of ambiguity and lexical availability on
syntactic and lexical production. Cognitive Psychology, 40, 296-340.
Fukumura, K., & van Gompel, R. P. G. (2012). Producing pronouns and definite noun
phrases: Do speakers use the addressee's discourse model? Cognitive Science, 36,
1289-1311.
Fussell, S. R., & Krauss, R. M. (1992). Coordination of knowledge in communication:
Effects of speakers' assumptions about others' knowledge. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 62, 378-391.
Gann, T. M., & Barr, D. J. (2014). Speaking from experience: Audience design as expert
performance. Language, Cognition and Neuroscience, 29, 744-760.
Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole, & J. Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and
semantics 3: Speech acts (pp. 41-58). New York: Academic Press.
Grodner, D., & Sedivy, J. C. (2011). The effect of speaker-specific information on pragmatic
inferences (pp. 239-271). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hintzman, D. L. (1986). Schema abstraction in a multiple-trace memory model.
Psychological Review, 93, 411-428.
Horton, W. S. (2007). The influence of partner-specific memory associations on language
production: Evidence from picture naming. Language and Cognitive Processes, 22,
1114-1139.
Horton, W. S., & Gerrig, R. J. (2005). The impact of memory demands on audience design
during language production. Cognition, 96, 127-142.
Horton, W. S., & Gerrig, R. J. (2016). Revisiting the memory-based processing approach
to common ground. Topics in Cognitive Science, 8, 780-795.
Horton, W. S., & Keysar, B. (1996). When do speakers take into account common ground?
Cognition, 59, 91-117.
Kahneman, D., & Frederick, S. (2002). Representativeness revisited: Attribute substitution in
intuitive judgment (pp. 49-81). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Kronmuller, E., & Barr, D. J. (2015). Referential precedents in spoken language
comprehension: A review and meta-analysis. Journal of Memory and Language, 83,
1-19.
Logan, G. D. (1988). Toward an instance theory of automatization. Psychological Review,
95, 492-527.
Logan, G. D., & Etherton, J. L. (1994). What is learned during automatization? The role of
attention in constructing an instance. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 20, 1022-1050.
Mayo, D. G. (2018). Statistical inference as severe testing. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Metzing, C., & Brennan, S. E. (2003). When conceptual pacts are broken: Partner-specific
effects on the comprehension of referring expressions. Journal of Memory and
Language, 49, 201-213.
Nadig, A. S., & Sedivy, J. C. (2002). Evidence of perspective-taking constraints on
children's on-line reference resolution. Psychological Science, 13, 329-336.
Pickering, M. J., & Garrod, S. (2004). Toward a mechanistic psychology of dialogue.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 27, 1-22.
Posner, M. I., & Keele, S. W. (1968). On the genesis of abstract ideas. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 77, 353-363.
R Core Team. (2017). R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. Vienna,
Austria: R Foundation for Statistical Computing.
Rosch, E., Mervis, C. B., Gray, W., Johnson, D., & Boyes-Braem, P. (1976). Basic objects
in natural categories. Cognitive Psychology, 8, 382-439.
Rossnagel, C. (2000). Cognitive load and perspective taking: Applying the automaticcontrolled distinction to verbal communication. European Journal of Social
Psychology, 30, 429-445.
Ryan, J. D., Althoff, R. R., Whitlow, S., & Cohen, N. J. (2000). Amnesia is a deficit in
relational memory. Psychological Science, 11, 454-461.
Simpson, I. C., Mousikou, P., Montoya, J. M., & Defior, S. (2013). A letter visualsimilarity matrix for latin-based alphabets. Behavior Research Methods, 45, 431-439.
Tulving, E., & Schacter, D. L. (1990). Priming and human memory systems. Science, 247,
301-306.
Tulving, E., & Thomson, D. M. (1973). Encoding specificity and retrieval processes in
episodic memory. Psychological Review, 80, 352-373.
Wardlow Lane, L., Groisman, M., & Ferreira, V. S. (2006). Don't think of a pink elephant!
Speakers' control over leaking private information during language production.
Psychological Science, 17, 273-277.

CRediT authorship contribution statement
Kieran J. O'Shea: Conceptualization, Methodology, Validation,
Formal analysis, Investigation, Resources, Writing - original draft,
Writing - review & editing, Visualization, Funding acquisition. Caitlyn
R. Martin: Investigation, Resources, Data curation. Dale J. Barr:
Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Validation, Formal analysis,
Resources, Data curation, Writing - original draft, Writing - review &
editing, Visualization, Supervision, Project administration, Funding
acquisition.
Appendix A. Supplementary material
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the
online version, at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2020.104186.
References
Ahn, S., & Brown-Schmidt, S. (2020). Retrieval processes and audience design. Journal of
Memory and Language, 115, 104149.
Barr, D. J., & Keysar, B. (2002). Anchoring comprehension in linguistic precedents.
Journal of Memory and Language, 46, 391-418.
Barr, D. J., Levy, R., Scheepers, C., & Tily, H. J. (2013). Random effects structure for
confirmatory hypothesis testing: Keep it maximal. Journal of Memory and Language,
68, 255-278.
Bates, D., Kliegl, R., Vasishth, S., & Baayen, H. (2015). Parsimonious mixed models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.04967.
Bates, D., Machler, M., Bolker, B., & Walker, S. (2015). Fitting linear mixed-effects
models using lme4. Journal of Statistical Software, 67, 1-48.
Brennan, S. E., & Clark, H. H. (1996). Conceptual pacts and lexical choice in
conversation. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 22,
1482-1493.
Brown-Schmidt, S. (2009). Partner-specific interpretation of maintained referential
precedents during interactive dialog. Journal of Memory and Language, 61, 171-190.
Brown-Schmidt, S., & Horton, W. S. (2014). The influence of partner-specific memory
associations on picture naming: A failure to replicate Horton (2007). PloS One, 9,
e109035.
Chun, M. M., & Jiang, Y. (1998). Contextual cueing: Implicit learning and memory of
visual context guides spatial attention. Cognitive Psychology, 36, 28-71.
Clark, H. H. (1973). The language-as-fixed-effect fallacy: A critique of language statistics
in psychological research. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 12,
335-359.
Clark, H. H., & Marshall, C. R. (1981). Definite reference and mutual knowledge. In
A. K. Joshe, B. L. Webber, & I. A. Sag (Eds.), Elements of discourse understanding (pp.
10-61). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Clark, H. H., & Murphy, G. L. (1982). Audience design in meaning and reference. In J. Le
Ny, & W. Kintsch (Eds.), Language and comprehension (pp. 287-299). Amsterdam:
North Holland Publishing.

19

