Brain & Language 222 (2021) 105012

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Brain and Language
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/b&l

Memory after visual search: Overlapping phonology, shared meaning, and
bilingual experience influence what we remember
Viorica Marian a, Sayuri Hayakawa a, *, Scott R. Schroeder b
a
b

Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, Northwestern University, 2240 North Campus Drive, Evanston, IL 60208, United States
Department of Speech, Language, Hearing Sciences, Hofstra University, 110, Hempstead, NY 11549, United States

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Bilingualism
Individual differences
Language experience
Visual memory
Visual world paradigm
Phonological overlap
Semantic overlap
Visual search
Object memory

How we remember the things that we see can be shaped by our prior experiences. Here, we examine how lin
guistic and sensory experiences interact to influence visual memory. Objects in a visual search that shared
phonology (cat-cast) or semantics (dog-fox) with a target were later remembered better than unrelated items.
Phonological overlap had a greater influence on memory when targets were cued by spoken words, while se
mantic overlap had a greater effect when targets were cued by characteristic sounds. The influence of overlap on
memory varied as a function of individual differences in language experience - greater bilingual experience was
associated with decreased impact of overlap on memory. We conclude that phonological and semantic features of
objects influence memory differently depending on individual differences in language experience, guiding not
only what we initially look at, but also what we later remember.

1. Introduction
In our daily lives, we frequently rely on our ability to locate specific
objects in complex visual scenes. In addition to internally-motivated
search tasks (e.g., looking for a landmark while driving), visual search
can be prompted by external stimuli, including linguistic instructions (e.
g., "watch out for that car") and environmental sounds (e.g., a car horn).
These examples illustrate the multimodal nature of visual search, which
often involves access to not only visual representations stored in longterm memory, but also other associated attributes, including semantic,
auditory, and linguistic features of a target object.
Evidence of such multimodal activation can be found using the Vi
sual World Paradigm (VWP), during which individuals are prompted to
look for a target among a set of visual objects. Eye-tracking reveals that
individuals often make visual fixations toward objects that are visually,
semantically, or linguistically similar to targets, indicating that objects
in a visual scene activate multiple levels of associated representations
(see Huettig, Rommers & Meyer, 2011 for a review). Though the impact
of cross-modal interactions on visual perception and attention has been
well established (Huettig & McQueen, 2007; Iordanescu, Grabowecky,
& Suzuki, 2011; Marian & Spivey, 2003a,b; Salverda & Altmann, 2011;
Talsma, Senkowski, Soto-Faraco, & Woldorff, 2010; Tanenhaus, SpiveyKnowlton, Eberhard, & Sedivy, 1995), including the influence of task-

related variables (e.g., language context; Marian & Spivey, 2003a, b)
and individual differences (e.g., bilingual experience; Blumenfeld &
Marian, 2007; Canseco-Gonzalez et al., 2010; Mercier, Pivneva, &
Titone, 2014), relatively less is known about the potential downstream
consequences for long-term memory.
The aims of the present study were twofold: first, to examine whether
semantic and phonological competition during visual search impacts
how well objects are later remembered, and second, to explore contex
tual and individual moderators, with a particular emphasis on the
impact of bilingual language experiences such as acquisition, exposure,
and proficiency.
1.1. Memory retrieval in visual search
Visual search and the mechanisms underlying how cross-modal in
puts interact to elicit fixations to visual targets (as well as their semantic
and phonological associates) involve a combination of bidirectional
sensory, attentional, and memory processes. Visual attention can be
guided by bottom-up, stimulus-driven processes (e.g., the perceptual
salience of objects in a visual scene; e.g., Itti & Koch, 2000, 2001), as
well as top-down, observer-driven influences such as task goals and in
ternal representations retrieved from and maintained in memory (Bahle
et al., 2020; Bravo & Farid, 2014; Cowan, 1998; Kerzel, 2019; van Loon,

* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: sayuri.hayakawa@northwestern.edu (S. Hayakawa).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2021.105012
Received 11 February 2021; Received in revised form 19 July 2021; Accepted 19 August 2021
Available online 28 August 2021
0093-934X/(c) 2021 Published by Elsevier Inc.

V. Marian et al.

Brain and Language 222 (2021) 105012

Olmos-Solis, & Olivers, 2017; see Wolfe, 2020 for review). According to
biased competition models of visual search (e.g., Desimone & Duncan,
1995; Duncan & Humphreys, 1989), objects in a visual scene compete
for representation and control in the visual cortex, and representations
held in working memory (WM; i.e., "attentional templates") can be used
to bias visual and attentional processing towards those that are most
relevant to the task at hand. For instance, Chelazzi et al. (1998) found
that after cuing monkeys with a target image, cells in the inferior tem
poral cortex (an area associated with object recognition) tuned to
properties of the target produced stronger responses than those of
non-targets once the search display was presented.
Similar evidence of anticipatory sensory enhancement has been
found when humans are cued, not with the visual target itself, but with a
symbol representing the object category (e.g., representing "people" or
"cars"; Peelen & Kastner, 2011). Preparing to respond to a familiar
category elicited category-specific patterns of neural activation in the
object-selective visual cortex, which subsequently facilitated detection
of previously unseen category exemplars. In addition to demonstrating
that representations held in WM can bias visual competition toward
corresponding inputs, these findings show that representations stored in
long-term memory (LTM; e.g., previously learned conceptual categories)
can be used to enhance processing of related stimuli. At the behavioral
level, biased competition elicits preferential fixations to possible targets
(Chelazzi et al., 1998), which can subsequently increase the resolution
of visual representations and facilitate the process of matching them to
internal target representations.
Though the term "top-down" is often associated with volitional and
effortful control, observer-driven influences can also operate implicitly,
such as when attention is guided by a previously seen visual prime (e.g.,
Huang, Holcombe, & Pashler's (2004) Episodic Theory of Priming in Visual
Search) or the cascaded activation of task-irrelevant object features
stored in LTM (e.g., phonological and semantic information; see Huettig
& McQueen's 2007 Cascaded-Activation Model of language-vision in
teractions). Critically for the present investigation, the processing of
visual scenes can be influenced by the activation of cross-modal repre
sentations stored in memory (e.g., spoken words, environmental
sounds), which can guide attention to facilitate or interfere with visual
search depending on whether they overlap with target or non-target
objects in the display (Iordanescu et al., 2011; Marian & Spivey,
2003a,b; Salverda & Altmann, 2011). Here too, WM is thought to play a
key role in directing attention and eye-movements by binding activated
representations to each other and to particular locations (see Huettig,
Olivers, & Hartsuiker, 2011; Wolfe, 2021). The retrieval and mainte
nance of WM and LTM traces thus play a significant role in guiding vi
sual attention and search.

reflect implicit learning, as memory-based facilitation is often observed
despite chance performance on explicit recognition tests (Chun &
Nakayama, 2000). Other studies have found, however, that objects and
scenes viewed during visual search are later recognized above chance
(Beck, Peterson, Boot, Vomela, & Kramer, 2006; Castelhano & Hen
derson, 2005; Hollingworth & Henderson, 2002; Hout & Goldinger,
2010; Lavelle et al., 2021) and to varying degrees depending on simi
larity to the target (Thomas & Williams, 2014; Williams et al., 2005,
2009; Williams, 2010). Williams, Henderson, and Zacks (2005) found
that, following a conjunction search task with written target cues (e.g.,
"white telephone"), recognition of target images exceeded that of
category-matched distractors (e.g., a blue telephone) and color-matched
distractors (e.g., a white pipe), which were in turn recognized more
often than unrelated distractors (e.g., a green wallet). Explicit memory
for distractors additionally appears to be associated with the duration of
time spent fixating the objects (Hout & Goldinger, 2012; Lavelle, Alonso,
Luria, & Drew, 2021), which tends to increase with greater similarity to
the target (Becker, 2011; Williams, 2010).
Together, these findings indicate that irrelevant objects viewed
during visual search can be incidentally encoded into LTM, and that the
strength of encoding increases with similarity to the target. To date,
however, the majority of existing studies have either tested memory for
unrelated distractors or manipulated dimensions of visual similarity (e.
g., shape or color, as in Williams et al., 2005, 2009). Therefore, while
there is evidence that visual relationships between objects influence
incidental encoding, little is known regarding potential interactions
with the linguistic system and representations retrieved from memory
(such as object labels and meanings), or the incidental encoding of visual
objects in response to cross-modal inputs (e.g., auditory target cues).
Similarly, while there has been significant interest in understanding the
role of individual differences in guiding visual search (including lan
guage experience, e.g., Blumenfeld & Marian, 2011, and domain-general
cognitive function, e.g., WM; Huettig & Janse, 2016), much less is
known regarding the impact of prior language experience on incidental
encoding of visual objects. The present study therefore examines how
memory for previously seen objects is moderated by the type of com
petitors encountered during visual search (semantic vs. phonological),
the type of auditory input used to cue the target (spoken words vs.
environmental sounds), and individual differences in bilingual
experience.
1.3. Auditory cues and visual search
When searching for a visual object (such as a picture, letter, or
number), hearing a corresponding auditory cue can facilitate its iden
tification and localization (Chen & Spence, 2010; Iordanescu, Grabo
wecky, Franconeri, Theeuwes, & Suzuki, 2010; Iordanescu et al., 2011;
Lupyan, 2008; Lupyan & Spivey, 2010). According to functional (Ior
danescu et al., 2011; Lupyan, 2012; Lupyan, 2007) and structural (Chen
& Spence, 2011) accounts, the interactive effects of auditory and visual
inputs arise from converging activation of object features across multi
ple levels of representation. Hearing a spoken word (e.g., "cat") or
environmental sound (e.g., "meow") can activate associated linguistic
and semantic information (e.g., the word and concept of a cat) stored in
LTM, as well as visual features of the cued object (e.g., ears, tail, whis
kers). When combined with bottom-up activation stemming from the
visual scene itself, an auditory input's top-down activation of visual
features can strengthen the perceptual salience of the cued object and
draw visual attention toward its location. Patterns of cascading and
converging activation could similarly account for why individuals often
make visual fixations toward objects that share semantic features with a
cued target (e.g., to a picture of a bone when cued with the word "dog"),
as well as toward objects whose labels sound similar (e.g., a picture of a
"doctor" when cued with "dog"; Allopenna, Magnuson, & Tanenhaus,
1998; Huettig & McQueen, 2007; Yee & Sedivy, 2006). Indeed,
linguistically-based competition has been observed even during entirely

1.2. Memory encoding during visual search
There is now convincing evidence that visual search can be influ
enced by features of earlier trials, indicating that information regarding
previously seen objects and their visual contexts are encoded to some
form of memory during the search task itself. For instance, when search
displays are repeated, participants are able to exploit memory for tar
gets' previous locations (Chun & Nakayama, 2000; Shore & Klein,
2000), as well as the locations and identities of paired distractor objects
to facilitate subsequent performance (i.e., a contextual cueing effect;
Chun & Jiang, 1998, 1999; cf. Horowitz & Wolfe, 1998). Neurophysi
ological and brain imaging studies indicate that such contextual cueing
effects are supported by neural regions implicated in LTM function (e.g.,
the medial temporal lobe and hippocampus; Chun & Phelps, 1999;
Greene et al., 2007), as well as cortical areas associated with visual
attention (Giesbrecht, Sy, & Guerin, 2013; Kasper et al., 2015; Olson,
Chun, & Allison, 2001).
Though the medial temporal lobe and hippocampus have tradition
ally been thought to support explicit, declarative memory (e.g., Mos
covitch et al., 2006), contextual cuing effects are generally believed to
2

V. Marian et al.

Brain and Language 222 (2021) 105012

bilingual and monolingual participants complete a simple lexical se
lection task identifying which of two images corresponded to a simul
taneously presented auditory word (e.g., "monkey"). While semantic
overlap (e.g., pictures of a monkey and a gorilla) resulted in slower RTs
for both bilinguals and monolinguals, there were distinct patterns of
event-related potentials (ERPs) depending on language background.
Specifically, the authors looked at the N400 component, which is sen
sitive to semantic incongruities and is typically reduced in response to
semantically-related stimulus pairs compared to unrelated stimuli
(Kutas & Federmeier, 2011); the reduced N400 negativity in response to
related pairs has therefore been interpreted as an index of semantic
integration (Holcomb & McPherson, 1994). Friesen et al. (2016) found
that while monolinguals showed the expected N400 attenuation in
response to semantically-related pictures (compared to unrelated pic
tures), no such effect was observed for bilinguals, leading the authors to
propose that the greater number of lexical candidates that must be
considered by bilinguals reduces (or perhaps delays) integration of se
mantic representations. We propose that such differences at early stages
of phonological and semantic processing could go on to affect long-term
memory, such that overlap between targets and competitors during
encoding may have a less notable influence on subsequent memory for
those who have substantial knowledge of and experience with multiple
languages.
Furthermore, the greater processing demands associated with man
aging multiple languages could go on to have more long-term conse
quences, such as through the enhancement of domain-general cognitive
control and working memory processes (Bialystok et al., 2009; Bialys
tok, Craik, & Luk, 2008; Costa, Hernandez, & Sebastian-Galles, 2008;
Grundy & Timmer, 2017). Bilinguals' cognitive control could facilitate
the management of phonological and semantic competitors during
encoding (Blumenfeld & Marian, 2011; Chabal, Schroeder, & Marian,
2015; Friesen et al., 2015; Hernandez, Costa, & Humphreys, 2012;
Mercier, Pivneva, & Titone, 2014) and subsequently reduce the impact
of overlapping features on long-term memory. Speaking to this possi
bility, recognition of previously seen distractors is greater following
tasks that impose a high (e.g., multiple targets) than low (e.g., single
target) WM load (Guevara Pinto, Papesh, & Hout, 2020; Hout & Gold
inger, 2010, 2012; cf. Lavelle et al., 2021), which has been posited to
result from a reduced capacity to inhibit irrelevant distractors.
Individual differences in WM capacity have similarly been shown to
predict the activation and inhibition of competing representations dur
ing language comprehension (Gunter, Wagner, & Friederici, 2003) and
linguistically-mediated visual search (Huettig & Janse, 2016). ERP
studies indicate that, compared to readers with high WM spans, those
with low WM spans are more likely to coactivate competing represen
tations when processing syntactically- (Vos & Friederici, 2003) or
lexically-ambiguous (Gunter et al., 2003) linguistic stimuli. For instance,
Gunter et al. (2003) examined the effects of WM capacity on the N400
component in response to sentences that included a homonym and a
subsequent disambiguating cue (e.g., "Since Ken really liked the boxer,
he took a bus to the nearest pet store [sports arena]"). Low-span readers
showed comparable N400s in response to cues inconsistent with the
dominant and subordinate meanings, indicating that both representa
tions were active in WM. High-span readers, on the other hand, had
larger N400s in response to cues inconsistent with the dominant than
subordinate meaning, suggesting that less probable representations
were inhibited with higher WM capacity. To the extent that bilingual
experience enhances the ability to suppress competing representations
during visual search, we may expect that subsequent effects of compe
tition on recognition memory would be reduced for bilinguals relative to
monolinguals.
Yet, due to significant variability in how bilingualism is operation
alized, studies comparing groups of individuals idiosyncratically clas
sified as "monolingual" vs. "bilingual" have yielded inconsistent
findings regarding the impact of language experience on cognitive
function (see Bedore et al., 2012; Luk & Bialystok, 2013; Marian &

non-linguistic tasks (e.g., a picture of a cloud cued by a picture of a clock;
Chabal & Marian, 2015). Though both semantic and phonological in
formation can become activated by linguistic and nonlinguistic stimuli,
it is likely that word forms and meanings are activated via different
routes of processing and to varying degrees depending on the input
(Chen & Spence, 2011). Bartolotti et al. (2020) found that the time
course of looks to semantic and phonological competitors differed
depending on whether targets were cued by a word or a sound, with
words eliciting early phonological competition followed by semantic
competition, and sounds eliciting early semantic competition followed
by phonological competition.
Based on work demonstrating that greater attentional deployment
and visual fixations to objects strengthens encoding into long-term
memory (e.g., Hout & Goldinger, 2012; Intraub, 1984; Lavelle et al.,
2021; Loftus, 1972; Potter & Levy, 1969; Williams et al., 2005), there is
reason to expect that effects of input and competition observed during
visual search would be reflected in subsequent recognition of visual
objects. We therefore hypothesize that long-term memory for visually
presented semantic and phonological competitors will differ depending
on whether their associated targets were previously cued by a word or a
sound. Specifically, we predicted that recognition of semantic compet
itors would be enhanced when initially viewed concurrently with a
sound compared to a word. Likewise, we would expect that direct,
bottom-up activation of target labels should make phonological simi
larities especially salient, potentially resulting in better recognition of
phonological competitors cued by words compared to sounds.
1.4. Individual differences in bilingual experience
In addition to contextual variables, individual differences in cogni
tive abilities and experiences can moderate the activation and subse
quent inhibition of competitors during visual search. Much like
interference that can arise during visual processing, comprehension of
spoken language requires the management of competing representa
tions. As a spoken word unfolds (e.g., "candle"), other words with
similar phonological features (e.g., "casket," "can," "candy") are acti
vated until the correct candidate can be identified (Luce & Pisoni,1998;
McClelland & Elman, 1986; McQueen & Cutler, 2001). Once accessed,
any given word can go on to activate other phonologically or semanti
cally related representations, each of which has the potential to influ
ence where an individual directs their attention and subsequently, what
they remember. Research with bilinguals suggests that the additional
processing demands associated with managing competition within and
between multiple languages may elicit both online (e.g., Friesen, ChungFat-Yim, & Bialystok; 2016; Kotz, 1997) and long-term (e.g., Bialystok,
Craik, Green & Gollan, 2009) changes to cognitive processing, which
could go on to modulate the influence of overlapping features on
memory.
Specifically, there is reason to expect that while bilinguals may
routinely need to manage a higher number of competitors (due to the
additional activation of lexical candidates across languages), this could
effectively dilute the level of activation associated with any given
competitor. Dahan, Magnuson, and Tanenhaus (2001) showed that
when participants were tasked with matching a picture to a spoken word
(e.g., "bench"), the salience of phonological competitors in the visual
scene varied as a function of word frequency - competitors with highfrequency labels (e.g., a bed) were fixated more often than those with
lower-frequency labels (e.g., a bell). Given that bilinguals are likely to
store and activate a larger number of lexical representations compared
to monolinguals (each of which may be less frequently encountered due
to reduced exposure to each language; see the frequency-lag or weaker
links hypothesis; Gollan, Montoya, & Werner, 2002; Gollan et al., 2008,
2011), it is possible that phonological, and possibly even semantic,
overlap between any given pair of stimuli may have a weaker effect on
later memory.
Support for this hypothesis comes from Friesen et al. (2016) who had
3

V. Marian et al.

Brain and Language 222 (2021) 105012

Hayakawa, 2021; Surrain & Luk, 2019; Sabourin et al., 2016 for dis
cussions). A growing consensus within the field has therefore been to
treat multilingualism not as a homogenous group or category, but rather
as a dynamic and interactive set of experiences and abilities that exist
along a spectrum. To this end, an increasing number of bilingualism
researchers have begun to step away from the monolingual-bilingual
dichotomy to instead examine the different factors that characterize
bilingual experience (e.g., Anderson, Hawrylewicz, & Bialystok, 2020;
Anderson, Mak, Chahi, & Bialystok, 2018; Gullifer et al., 2021; Li,
Sepanski, & Zhao, 2006; Luk & Bialystok, 2013; Marian, Blumenfeld, &
Kaushanskaya, 2007; Marian & Hayakawa, 2021), as well as the aspects
of bilingual experience that affect cognition (Beatty-Martinez et al.,
2020; Chung-Fat-Yim, Sorge, & Bialystok, 2020; Hartanto & Yang,
2016), behavior (Beatty-Martinez & Dussias, 2017; Tiv, Gullifer, Feng, &
Titone, 2020), and the brain (DeLuca, Rothman, Bialystok, & Pliatsikas,
2019; Gullifer et al., 2018; Pliatsikas, DeLuca, Moschopoulou, & Saddy,
2017; Sulpizio, Del Maschio, Del Mauro, Fedeli, & Abutalebi, 2019).
The ability to identify meaningful variables that capture distinct
aspects of bilingual experience is critical for advancing our under
standing of the role of language in cognitive and neural function more
broadly (e.g., the impact of different contexts of language use, see Green
and Abutalebi's, 2013 Adaptive Control Hypothesis). Illustrating the
latter, DeLuca et al. (2019) found that different aspects of language
experience (e.g., L2 age of acquisition (AoA), duration of language use,
contexts of use) were associated with distinct forms of functional and
structural neuroadaptations (e.g., resting-state connectivity, white
matter volume, reshaping of subcortical structures). Particularly rele
vant for the present investigation, the authors observed that duration of
L2 use (AoA) was associated with greater functional connectivity in the
visual network and adaptations in subcortical structures (e.g., thal
amus), which are respectively associated with more efficient visual and
language processing. Duration of L2 immersion was also associated with
subcortical adaptations in regions associated with automatized language
control (e.g., caudate nucleus, thalamus).
Taking a similar approach, Sulpizio et al. (2019) observed that
longer durations of L2 experience were associated with increased con
nectivity between the posterior superior temporal gyrus (associated with
the integration of phonological and conceptual processing; Bonilha
et al., 2017; Hickok & Poeppel, 2004) and the left precuneus (implicated
in attentional processing, Cavanna & Trimble, 2005), which the authors
suggest may facilitate attentional control over the activation of
lexico-phonological representations. Other studies have shown that ef
fects of different forms of bilingual experience on neural function predict
behavioral measures of cognitive control (e.g., effects of AoA and di
versity of language use on functional connectivity and proactive control;
Gullifer et al., 2018). As attested by these findings, taking an individual
differences approach to studying the consequences of bilingualism can
provide substantial insight into the relationships between language,
cognition, and the brain, including the impact of specific language ex
periences on particular cognitive processes.
With this goal in mind, the present study includes participants with
varying degrees of English and Spanish experience, and examines the
relationships between memory for phonological and semantic compet
itors and language background using two approaches: first by treating
bilingualism as a categorical construct (monolinguals vs. bilinguals),
and then with the use of multiple continuous measures tapping into
different dimensions of bilingual experience. In addition to elucidating
the aspects of bilingualism that may moderate the overall impact of
competition on memory, specific effects of competition type (phono
logical vs. semantic) and auditory input (word vs. sound) may
contribute to understanding the extent to which the consequences of
language experience are restricted to linguistic contexts or result in
cross-domain changes to the cognitive system.

2. Methods
2.1. Participants
Fifty-two participants with varying degrees of multilingual experi
ence (82.7% female, mean age = 21.48, SD = 3.36) were included in the
analysis, with an additional two participants excluded due to missing
datai. Participants were native speakers of English (N = 32), Spanish (N
= 17), or both (N = 3) and completed the experiment in either the Sound
(N = 25) or Word (N = 27) condition. As determined by the Language
Experience and Proficiency Questionnaire (LEAP-Q; Marian et al.,
2007), all participants were highly proficient in English with scores
ranging from 7 to 10 (out of 10) (M = 9.26, SD = 0.95), and had Spanish
proficiency scores ranging from 0 to 10 (M = 4.53, SD = 4.01). English
age of acquisition (AoA) ranged from 0 to 25 (M = 2.31, SD = 4.08), and
Spanish AoA ranged from 0 to 24, with AoA set to the current age among
those with no Spanish knowledge (M = 10.17, SD = 8.76) for analysesii.
Current English exposure ranged from 25% to 100% of the time (M =
83.37, SD = 19.91) and current Spanish exposure ranged from 0% to
75% of the time (M = 15.17, SD = 19.33). Four native English speakers
with no Spanish experience reported minimal second language profi
ciency (<3/10) in another language (Italian, French, Latin). Among all
participants, 18 reported some level of proficiency with 3 or more lan
guages (French, Hebrew, Italian, Latin, Portuguese, Chinese). Partici
pants in the Sound and Word conditions did not differ from each other in
gender (p = .515), age (p = .140), English proficiency (p = .120),
Spanish proficiency (p = .622), English AoA (p = .697), Spanish AoA (p
= .463), English exposure (p = .823), Spanish exposure (p = .696), or
number of known languages (p = .680).
2.2. Design and materials
The study was designed as a 2 (Input) x 2 (Competition Type) x 3
(Object Type) mixed design with Input (Sounds, Words) varying
between-subjects, and with Competition Type (Phonological, Semantic)
and Object Type (Target, Competitor, Control) varying within-subjects.
For the encoding phase of the experiment, participants completed a
series of visual search trials during which they were presented with an
auditory target cue (either a word or a sound) and a visual display
depicting four objects. After all search trials, participants completed a
surprise recognition memory test of the previously seen critical objects
(targets, competitors, and controls). Fifteen sets of stimuli were
compiled for phonological trials, which included three critical objects
for the memory test: a target (e.g., a cat), an English phonological
competitor (e.g., a cast), and an unrelated control object (e.g., an iron).
Similarly, the fifteen semantic sets included a target (e.g., a dog), a
categorical semantic competitor (e.g., a fox), and an unrelated control
object (e.g., a flashlight; see Table A1 in the Appendix for full list of
critical items in each set). Each set additionally included filler items (see
below), which did not appear on the memory test. All depicted objects
across the 15 phonological and 15 semantic sets were matched on En
glish and Spanish word frequency (SUBTLEXUS; Brysbaert & New, 2009;
LEXESP; Sebastian-Galles, Marti, Cuetos, & Carreiras, 2000), English
and Spanish phonological neighborhood size (CLEARPOND; Marian,
i
Data were collected as part of a larger study, with a subset of functionally
monolingual participants contributing to separate findings reported in Barto
lotti et al., 2020.
ii
Measures of English and Spanish AoA included in the analyses were con
verted to proportions of the participant's lifespan during which they had
experience with each language ([current age - AoA]/current age). In addition
to controlling for differences in current ages across participants, this approach
simplified our interpretation of the results by having higher scores represent
greater language experience for all language measures (e.g., AoA, proficiency,
current exposure, etc.).

4

V. Marian et al.

Brain and Language 222 (2021) 105012

Fig. 1. Example visual search displays for Target-Present/Competitor-Present (top left), Target-Present/Competitor-Absent (top right), Target-Absent/CompetitorPresent (bottom left), and Target-Absent/Competitor-Absent (bottom right) trials constructed from a phonological stimulus set. Critical items for the subsequent
memory test included the target (e.g., a cat), competitor (e.g., a cast), and control (e.g., an iron) objects.

Bartolotti, Chabal, & Shook, 2012), English and Spanish orthographic
neighborhood size (CLEARPOND; Marian et al., 2012), familiarity,
concreteness, and imageability (MRC Psycholinguistic Database;
Coltheart, 1981; BuscaPalabras; Davis & Perea, 2005).
Each of the 30 stimulus sets was used to construct four different trial
types for the visual search task: 1) Target-Present/Competitor-Present,
which included a target, a competitor adjacent to the target, and two
unrelated filler objects, 2) Target-Present/Competitor-Absent, which
included a target, an unrelated control adjacent to the target and two
fillers, 3) Target-Absent/Competitor-Present, which included a
competitor and three fillers, and 4) Target-Absent/Competitor-Absent,
which included a control and three fillers. Each of the critical objects
therefore appeared an equal number of times, with the target always
appearing adjacent to either the competitor or the control object and the
competitors and controls never appearing within the same display (see
Fig. 1 for an example of each trial type). Each trial type for each set was
presented twice (with different fillers) and the position of objects in the
display were counterbalanced across trials; each object therefore
appeared a total of four times, each time in a different position. Par
ticipants completed a total of 240 trials (30 stimulus sets x 4 trial types
x 2 presentations), with phonological and semantic trials interspersed.
Visual objects were positioned in the four corners of a 3 x 3 square
grid with a fixation cross in the center. Objects were depicted as black
and white line drawings obtained from the International Picture Naming
Database (Szekely et al., 2004) and were similar in saturation and line
thickness. Spoken words cueing the 30 target objects were recorded at
44.1 Hz by a Midwestern female speaker of Standard American English

and environmental sounds were selected from previous studies in our
lab and from online databases. All auditory cues were amplitude
normalized and presented to participants through closed-back head
phones. Participants were seated approximately 80 cm away from the
computer screen (2560 x 1440 resolution).
2.3. Procedure
2.3.1. Encoding phase
During the encoding phase, participants were presented with a set of
practice trials to familiarize them with the visual search task before
completing the 240 test trials. Each trial began with a fixation cross for
1500 ms, followed by a four-picture visual display for 5000 ms. An
auditory target cue (either a spoken word or environmental sound)
began playing 500 ms after the onset of the search display and partici
pants were instructed to click on the target picture as quickly as possible
if it was present, and on the central fixation cross if it was absent.
Following a response, a green border appeared around the selected
quadrant. The search display remained on screen for 5000 ms regardless
of when a response was made so that the encoding time was fixed across
all trials and participants (see Fig. 2 for example trial timeline).
2.3.2. Retrieval phase
Following the encoding phase, participants were presented with a
surprise recognition memory test, which included each of the critical 90
images (30 target, 30 competitor, and 30 control pictures), as well as 60
"foil" pictures that were not previously seen. On each trial, participants
5

V. Marian et al.

Brain and Language 222 (2021) 105012

Fig. 2. Example timeline for a Target-Present/
Competitor-Present visual search trial completed
during the encoding phase. Participants were
presented with a fixation cross for 1500 ms, fol
lowed by a four-object search display. An audi
tory target cue (either a spoken word or
environmental sound) was presented 500 ms
following the onset of the search display and
participants were instructed to click on the target
if it was present or the central fixation cross if it
was absent. The search display remained on
screen for a total of 5000 ms regardless of when a
response was made.

3. Results

were presented with a single picture and asked to click on a box marked
OLD if it had been previously seen during the encoding phase and on a
box marked NEW if it had not. Following each trial, participants clicked
on a box in the center of the screen to center the mouse position.
Memory for each of the three critical object types was assessed as the
proportion of items that were correctly recognized as "old." The order of
presentation for the recognition test was randomized for each
participant.

3.1. How auditory input (words or sounds) and language group
(monolinguals or bilinguals) impact memory for semantic and
phonological competitors
We began by examining the effects of Object Type (Target,
Competitor, Control), Competition Type (Phonological, Semantic),
Input (Sound, Word) and Language Group (Monolingual, Bilingual) on
participants' recognition of previously viewed visual objects. English
speakers with no Spanish experience were designated as Monolingual
(N = 17), while those with both English and Spanish experience were
designated as Bilingual (N = 35). The two groups did not differ in
gender, age, or English proficiency (averaged across reading, under
standing, and speaking; ps > 0.05). Age of English acquisition was
earlier in the Monolingual than Bilingual group (Ms = 0.71 and 3.09
years old, respectively; t(44.9) = 2.74, p = .009). Object Type was
reverse Helmert coded to create two contrasts: (1) Targets (- 0.67) vs.
Competitors and Controls (+0.33) and (2) Competitors (- 0.5) vs. Con
trols (+0.5). Competition Type was contrast coded to compare Phono
logical (- 0.5) vs. Semantic (+0.5), Input was contrast coded to compare
Sounds (- 0.5) vs. Words (+0.5), and Language Group was contrast
coded and weighted by the number of participants to compare Mono
linguals (- 0.67) vs. Bilinguals (+0.33). The maximally-converging
model included random intercepts for participant and stimulus set, as
well as a by-participant random slope for Object Type and by-set random
slopes for Object Type and Input.
Participants remembered competitor objects (M = 83.9%, SD = 14.6)
significantly better than control objects (M = 65.4%, SD = 20.5; Esti
mate = - 1.70, SE = 0.35, z = - 4.95, p < .0001; see Fig. 3), indicating
that similarities to targets impacted subsequent memory for irrelevant

2.4. Data analysis
Two sets of analyses were conducted to 1) determine the impact of
auditory input, competition, and a categorical variable of bilingualism
on subsequent memory, and 2) assess whether effects of competition are
moderated by continuous measures of individual differences in bilingual
expertise and experience. Effects of auditory input, phonological/se
mantic competition, and (categorical) bilingualism were first examined
using generalized linear mixed-effects models in the R environment
(glmer function of the lme4 package, Bates et al., 2015), with recognition
accuracy entered as a binomial outcome variable (0 = incorrect, 1 =
correct). Subsequent effects of individual difference measures were
examined using linear mixed-effects models (lmer function of the lme4
package, Bates et al., 2015) with continuous outcome variables repre
senting participants' mean competition effects, calculated as the pro
portion of correctly recognized competitor items minus correctly
recognized control items. In each case, we began with the maximal
random effects structure (Barr, Levy, Scheepers, & Tily, 2013), as
justified by the design, and resolved convergence errors by first
removing random correlations and then sequentially dropping random
effects explaining the least variance until convergence was achieved.
Details for specific models are presented in Sections 3.1 and 3.2.
6

V. Marian et al.

Brain and Language 222 (2021) 105012

Fig. 3. Effects of Input (Sound, Word), Competition Type (Phonological, Semantic), and Language Group (Bilingual, Monolingual) on recognition accuracy (%) for
competitor (black) and control objects (gray). Memory of competitors exceeded that of controls, with larger effects of competition for monolinguals than bilinguals
and larger effects of phonological competition on memory in the word than sound condition. Error bars represent standard errors. Simple effects were Tukeycorrected for multiple comparisons. *<0.05, **<0.01, ***<0.001.

items. Recognition of target objects (M = 98.8%, SD = 3.7) was greater
than that of both controls and competitors (Estimate = - 9.70, SE = 2.30,
z = - 4.22, p < .0001), and objects in semantic sets (M = 87.2%, SD =
16.7) were remembered better than those in phonological sets (M =
78.1%, SD = 22.0; Estimate = 2.40, SE = 1.22, z = 1.96, p = .049).
The effect of competition (competitors - controls) on recognition was
greater among monolinguals (M = 26.5%, SD = 17.0) than bilinguals (M
= 14.6%, SD = 15.3), reflected by a significant interaction between
Language Group and the second Object contrast comparing competitors
to controls (Estimate = 0.57, SE = 0.22, z = 2.59, p = .009). Tukeyadjusted follow-up comparisons revealed that memory for control ob
jects was greater among bilinguals than monolinguals (Estimate = 0.97,
SE = 0.23, z = 3.51, p < .001), while memory for competitors was
comparable in the two groups (Estimate = 0.40, SE = 0.34, z = 1.16, p =
.245). The difference between competitor and control recognition was
therefore greater for monolinguals than bilinguals.
Lastly, there was a significant three-way interaction between
Competition Type, Input, and the second Object contrast comparing
competitors to controls (Estimate = 1.12, SE = 0.32, z = 3.50, p < .001;
see Table A2 of the Appendix for full output). Follow-up comparisons
revealed that the effects of competition depended on both the type of
competition and the auditory input. Recognition of phonological

competitors exceeded that of phonological controls when the target was
cued by a word (Estimate = - 1.60, SE = 0.49, z = - 3.30, p = .013), but
not by a sound (Estimate = - 1.22, SE = 0.49, z = 2.49, p = .126). Se
mantic competitors exceeded semantic controls in both the word (Esti
mate = - 1.80, SE = 0.50, z = - 3.58, p = .005) and sound conditions
(Estimate = - 2.59, SE = 0.52, z = - 4.98, p < .0001). In sum, we find that
competition during visual processing does indeed impact subsequent
memory, with its effect moderated by both language background and
auditory input. When bilingualism is treated as a categorical variable,
effects of competition are reduced for bilinguals compared to mono
linguals, and the effect of phonological competition is greater when
targets are cued by words than sounds. This latter finding is consistent
with the idea that words and sounds access lexical information through
different routes of cascading activation, with smaller effects of compe
tition on memory with more indirect pathways of processing.
3.2. How individual differences in language experience impact memory
for semantic and phonological competitors
3.2.1. Variable selection
To quantify participants' levels of bilingual experience and ability,
composite measures of dual-language acquisition, usage, and
7

V. Marian et al.

Brain and Language 222 (2021) 105012

English and Spanish (see Table 1 for specific measures). To illustrate, a
participant with full proficiency (10/10) in both English and Spanish
would receive a dual-language proficiency score of 10, while a partici
pant with full proficiency in English and no proficiency in Spanish would
receive a score of 5. As the sample included participants with no second
language experience, age-related variables (i.e., ages of first acquisition
and fluency) were converted to measures representing the proportion of
an individual's lifespan during which they had been exposed to or fluent
in each language (0-100%). As with proficiency, acquisition measures
were aggregated across English and Spanish so that an individual who
was exposed to both English and Spanish from birth would receive a
score of 100 while someone exposed to English from birth with no
exposure to Spanish would receive a score of 50.
As many language background measures are often highly correlated,
the inclusion of each measure in the same model could introduce issues
of multicollinearity. We therefore subjected the measures to a principal
components analysis in order to extract uncorrelated metrics of lan
guage experience that captured a significant proportion of variance
across the raw measures. Importantly, this approach allowed us to
reduce the number of variables based on the observed relationships
among the raw measures (i.e., using an unsupervised dimension
reduction algorithm) rather than on theoretical or arbitrary judgments
regarding each measure's relevance and relative importance. As prin
cipal component analyses rely on correlations among variables to ach
ieve dimension reduction, we began by examining the correlational
structure of the mean-centered and scaled dual-language measures in
order to identify clusters of correlated variables, which was followed by
principal component analyses within each cluster (Baayen, 2008). The
reduced number of measures contributing to individual components
additionally simplified interpretations of each metric while minimizing
the likelihood that components extracted from different clusters would
be significantly correlated with each other.
The varclus function in the Hmisc package (Harrell, 2017) was used to
visually cluster variables based on Spearman's rank correlation,
revealing three groups of associated measures (see Fig. A1 of Appendix).
Principal components were then extracted using the prcomp function in
the stats package (R Core Team, 2017) to derive uncorrelated composite
measures representing each cluster. Rotation matrices were used to
determine each component's relationship to the original measures (see
Table 2). The loadings described by the rotation matrices are propor
tional to the correlation between each raw measure and each compo
nent, providing insight into the factors most strongly represented by
each metric.
Three components were extracted from the first cluster, with the
most significant representing dual-language proficiency and early
dual-language acquisition. This component was most strongly (posi
tively) correlated with measures of bilingual proficiency and duration of
bilingual experience (i.e., our proportion measure of AoA). The second
component was associated with single-language exposure and was
most strongly (negatively) correlated with measures of bilingual expo
sure through radio and reading. The third component indexed duallanguage exposure in informal contexts and was most strongly
(positively) correlated with measures of bilingual exposure through
family and television. An additional three components were extracted
from the second cluster, each representing durations of dual-language
immersion in different contexts (general, family, country). Lastly, a
single component was taken from the third cluster, representing duallanguage acquisition and exposure in formal contexts (language
platforms, laboratories). The collin.fnc function in the languageR package
(Baayen, 2011) was used to verify that there was no collinearity among
the final selected variables ( = 2.18).

Table 1
Language Experience and Proficiency Measures.
Measure

Dimensions

Score

Language Proficiency

Speaking, Reading,
Understanding Spoken
Language1, Foreign Accent2

1

Duration of Language
Proficiency (AoA)

Speaking, Reading, Speaking
Fluency, Reading Fluency

Duration of Language
Immersion
Current Language
Exposure Across
Contexts
Contributions to
Language Acquisition

Country, Family, School

0 (none) - 10
(perfect)
0 (never) - 10
(always)
(current age AoA)/
current age
Years

Friends, Family, Television,
Radio, Reading, Formal Study

0 (never) -
10 (always)

Friends, Family, Television,
Radio, Reading, Formal Study

0 (not a
contributor) -
10 (most important
contributor)

2

Table 2
Rotation Matrices for Principal Component Analyses.
Cluster 1

speaking
reading
understanding
propAgeStart
propAgeFluent
propAgeStartRead
propAgeFluentRead
acqTV
acqFam
acqRead
acqFriend
acqRadio
expRadio
expFriends
expFam
expRead
expTV
accent
Proportion of
Variance
Cumulative
Proportion

Dual-Language
Proficiency +
Acquisition
(PC1)

SingleLanguage
Exposure
(PC2)

Informal DualLanguage
Exposure
(PC3)

0.29
0.28
0.28
0.28
0.27
0.26
0.25
0.25
0.24
0.22
0.22
0.22
0.21
0.20
0.20
0.18
0.09
- 0.21
0.57

0.19
0.19
0.22
0.16
0.07
0.21
0.14
- 0.15
0.07
0.11
- 0.17
- 0.32
- 0.41
- 0.21
- 0.27
- 0.38
- 0.31
- 0.29
0.09

- 0.04
- 0.02
0.04
0.13
- 0.02
0.14
- 0.03
- 0.30
0.03
- 0.11
- 0.38
- 0.28
- 0.01
- 0.25
0.46
0.25
0.48
- 0.27
0.07

0.57

0.66

0.73

Cluster 2

yrsFam
yrsSchool
yrsCountry
Proportion of
Variance
Cumulative
Proportion

Dual-Language
Immersion
(general)
(PC1)

Dual-Language
Immersion
(family)
(PC2)

Dual-Language
Immersion
(country)
(PC3)

0.55
0.59
0.59
0.64

0.83
- 0.44
- 0.33
0.20

- 0.07
- 0.68
0.73
0.16

0.64

0.84

1.00

Cluster 3
Formal Dual-Language Acquisition/Exposure
(PC1)
acqTapes
expLab
Proportion of Variance
Cumulative Proportion

0.71
0.71
0.76
0.76

3.2.2. Effects of bilingual experience on memory
Mean competition effects (memory accuracy for competitors minus
controls) were entered as outcome variables in a linear mixed-effects
model with fixed effects of Input, Competition Type, each of the seven

proficiency were calculated by averaging LEAP-Q responses across

8

V. Marian et al.

Brain and Language 222 (2021) 105012

Fig. 4. Interactive effects of competition and language experience on visual memory. Effects of semantic competition on memory decreased with greater duallanguage proficiency and earlier acquisition (left), while effects of phonological competition on memory decreased with greater dual-language immersion (right).

differential effects depending on the source of the competition. While
the impact of semantic competition declines with earlier acquisition and
greater proficiency across multiple languages, the effect of phonological
competition declines with longer durations of immersion in bilingual
environments.
When the effects of individual differences were broken down by
input condition, we observed that the influence of Dual-Language Pro
ficiency/Acquisition on memory for semantic competitors (relative to
controls) was more pronounced when the target was cued by a word
(Estimate = - 0.04, SE = 0.01, t = - 2.72, p = .014) than by a sound
(Estimate = - 0.01, SE = 0.01, t = - 1.40, p = .181), whereas the effect of
Dual-Language Immersion on memory for phonological competitors
(relative to controls) was greater for sounds (Estimate = - 0.06, SE =
0.02, t = - 2.30, p = .034) than for words (Estimate = - 0.06, SE = 0.05, t
= - 1.21, p = .240). Lastly, Formal Dual-Language Acquisition/Exposure
was found to reduce the impact of phonological competition on memory
in the sound (Estimate = - 0.08, SE = 0.02, t = - 3.73, p = .002), but not

individual difference measures (unrotated principal components), and
all two- and three-way interactions between Input, Competition Type,
and each measure, as well as a random intercept for participant. There
was a significant two-way interaction between Input and Competition
Type (Estimate = - 0.30, SE = 0.09, t(36) = - 3.38, p = .002), with
greater effects of phonological competition on memory in the word
condition (M = 0.22, SD = 0.22) than in the sound condition (M = 0.15,
SD = 0.12; Estimate = 0.15, SE = 0.08, t = 2.04, p = .048), and greater
effects of semantic competition on memory in the sound condition (M =
0.22, SD = 0.14) than in the word condition (M = 0.15, SD = 0.16;
Estimate = - 0.15, SE = 0.06, t = - 2.57, p =.014).
A number of interactions emerged with bilingual individual differ
ence measures, including a two-way interaction between Competition
Type and Dual-Language Proficiency + Acquisition (Cluster1_PC1; Es
timate = - 0.04, SE = 0.01, t(36) = - 2.53, p = .016), between Compe
tition Type and general Dual-Language Immersion (Cluster2_PC1;
Estimate = 0.08, SE = 0.03, t(36) = 2.42, p = .021), and a three-way
interaction between Input, Competition Type, and Informal DualLanguage Exposure (Cluster1_PC3; Estimate = - 0.17, SE = 0.07, t(36)
= - 2.29, p = .028; see Table A3 of the Appendix for full output). Followup analyses revealed that individuals with greater dual-language profi
ciency and acquisition were significantly less impacted by semantic
competition at memory retrieval (that is, less likely to have better
recognition of semantic competitors relative to controls) compared to
those with less dual-language experience (Estimate = - 0.03, SE = 0.01, t
= - 2.99, p = .005). Dual-language proficiency and acquisition had little
effect on how much phonological competition affected memory (p =
.476). There was, however, a marginally significant effect of DualLanguage Immersion (general) for the impact of phonological (but not
semantic; p = .250) competition (Estimate = - 0.06, SE = 0.03, t =
- 1.96, p = .057), where experience living in multilingual environments
was associated with reduced effects of competition on memory (see
Fig. 4). We therefore find evidence that the impact of both semantic and
phonological competition on memory is reduced with greater bilingual
experience, but that specific aspects of language history and ability have
9

V. Marian et al.

Brain and Language 222 (2021) 105012

the word condition (p = .666).iii
In sum, we observed that the influence of semantic competition was
greater in response to sounds than words, and of phonological compe
tition in response to words than sounds. This pattern is consistent with
our prediction that effects of competition on memory should be most
pronounced when competing representations are activated via more
direct routes of processing (i.e., sounds to semantic representations and
words to phonological representations). We additionally found that in
dividual differences in bilingual experience predicted the size of
competitor effects, and that the impact of bilingualism differed
depending on the type of competition (semantic, phonological), type of
input (sounds, words), and form of dual language experience (profi
ciency/acquisition, immersion, exposure).

stored in long term memory. The moderating effects of auditory input
are consistent with models of multisensory cognitive processing (e.g.,
Chen & Spence, 2011), as well as with prior eye-tracking research
(Bartolotti et al., 2020) suggesting that listening to words vs. sounds
elicits different routes and magnitudes of phonological and semantic
activation. Specifically, hearing a word representing a target object
should directly activate phonological representations, making similar
ities with competitor labels especially salient and subsequently, the ef
fects of phonological competition on memory greater for words than for
sounds. Hearing a characteristic sound of the target, on the other hand,
is hypothesized to directly activate semantic features, highlighting
conceptual relationships between target and competitor objects and
resulting in greater semantic competition in response to sounds
compared to words.
The interactive effects of auditory cue and competition type indicate
that words and sounds elicit different degrees of competition through
their indirect routes of processing. Recognition accuracy for phonolog
ical and semantic competitors was higher than for control items
regardless of auditory input, providing tentative evidence that lexical
and conceptual information about visual objects can be indirectly acti
vated by either sounds (e.g., "meow" [input]  cat [concept] "c-a-t"
[word] "c-a-s-t" [word]) or words (e.g., "dog" [input] "d-o-g"
[word]  dog [concept]  fox [concept]). The effect of phonological
competition on memory, however, did not reach significance when the
target was cued by a sound, whereas effects of semantic competition on
memory emerged for both words and sounds (albeit to a lesser extent
when the target was cued by a word).
We additionally observed that objects in semantic sets were gener
ally recognized better than those in phonological sets. While this finding
should be interpreted with caution given that different items were used
for displays containing phonological and semantic competitors, it is
largely consistent with priming studies showing that drawing attention
to semantic (vs. phonemic) features of items elicits deeper levels of
processing and encoding to explicit memory (Craik & Lockhart, 1972;
Richardson-Klavehn & Gardiner, 1998). Though such effects have most
often been produced by instructing participants to respond to semantic
vs. phonemic characteristics of words, the present findings may indicate
that the mere presence of semantic vs. phonological competitors in a
visual display can elicit corresponding levels of processing for visible
objects, producing superior explicit memory for those in semantic than
phonological sets.
In sum, we provide evidence that cuing targets of a visual search with
a characteristic sound increases the influence of semantic overlap on
visual memory, while cueing targets with a spoken word increases the
influence of phonological overlap. How well visual objects are remem
bered therefore depends on auditory features that were present during
encoding, revealing the impact of the brain's cross-modal interactive
architecture on long term memory.

4. Discussion
The goals of the present research were twofold. First, we sought to
determine whether phonological and semantic similarities between
objects seen during a visual search would impact how well the objects
were later remembered. Second, we examined whether auditory input
(sounds vs. words) and individual differences in language experience
(bilingual proficiency, acquisition, and exposure) would influence the
degree to which memory was influenced by semantic and phonological
competition.
We discovered that objects that were phonologically (e.g., cat-cast)
or semantically (e.g., dog-fox) related to targets were later remem
bered better than control objects. Furthermore, the effect of competition
on memory was moderated by the type of auditory input used to cue the
target during visual search - the effect of phonological competition on
memory was most robust for spoken words (e.g., "cat"), while the effect
of semantic competition on memory was stronger for environmental
sounds (e.g., "meow'). We also find that bilingual language expertise
and experience lessened the degree to which memory was influenced by
the presence of competing distractors, with different aspects of bilingual
experience reducing the impact of phonological and semantic feature
overlap.
4.1. Auditory cues and visual search
The better recognition of previously observed competitor objects
extends earlier work on visual perception and attention, showing that
patterns of cascading activation that influence online processing of vi
sual scenes have downstream consequences for how information is
iii
Similar patterns were observed when analyses were restricted to partici
pants reporting some level of proficiency in both English and Spanish (N = 35)
and the number of known languages (ranging from 2 to 5) was included in the
models. As was found with the full sample, the impact of semantic competition
on memory was significantly reduced with greater Dual-Language Proficiency
and Acquisition (Estimate = - 0.02, SE = 0.01, t = - 2.32, p = .029). A signif
icant interaction with Input condition (-0.06, SE = 0.02, t = - 2.98, p = .006)
revealed that the effect of Dual-Language Proficiency and Acquisition was
greater in response to words (Estimate = - 0.05, SE = 0.02, t = - 3.53, p = .004)
than sounds (Estimate = 0.008, SE = 0.01, t = 0.57, p = .581). The impact of
phonological competition on memory was significantly reduced with greater
Dual-Language Immersion (general) (Estimate = - 0.06, SE = 0.02, t = - 2.96, p
= .007), as well as Formal Dual-Language Acquisition/Exposure (Estimate =
- 0.05, SE = 0.02, t = - 2.59, p = .016). While the interaction with Input
condition did not reach significance for either measure (ps > 0.05), we repli
cated the patterns observed for the full sample, with significant effects of both
Dual-Language Immersion (Estimate = - 0.06, SE = 0.01, t = - 4.62, p < .001)
and Formal Dual-Language Acquisition/Exposure (Estimate = - 0.09, SE = 0.02,
t = - 5.89, p < .001) in response to sounds, but not words (Immersion: Estimate
= - 0.05, SE = 0.03, t = - 1.44, p = .176; Formal: Estimate = - 0.02, SE = 0.04, t
= - 0.50, p = .624). There were no main effects or interactions with the number
of known languages (ps > 0.05).

4.2. Individual differences in bilingual experience
We propose that bilingualism may reduce the impact of competing
representations on memory through a number of different mechanisms,
including 1) more distributed activation of lexical and semantic repre
sentations (i.e., related words within and across languages), which could
dilute the salience of any given competitor, 2) less frequent exposure to
the words and sounds of a single language, which could attenuate the
activation of any given competitor, and 3) better cognitive control over
competing representations due to long-term experience managing coactivation within and across languages.
Indeed, we found that when language background was operational
ized as a categorical variable, effects of competition on recognition
memory were greater among monolinguals (i.e., native English speakers
reporting no Spanish experience) compared to bilinguals (i.e., native
English or Spanish speakers with proficiency in both languages).
Notably, however, the smaller difference between competitor and
10

V. Marian et al.

Brain and Language 222 (2021) 105012

control recognition in the bilingual group was primarily driven by
enhanced memory for unrelated controls relative to the monolingual
group, rather than by reduced memory for competitors. One possibility
is that this pattern stems from distinct effects of bilingualism on topdown vs. bottom-up attentional guidance during visual search.
Hernandez et al. (2012) observed that, compared to monolinguals, bi
linguals experienced less interference from irrelevant objects held in
WM, but were equally distracted by salient, irrelevant objects in the
display (e.g., a singleton). Bilingual experience may have therefore
enhanced the control of interference from competing phonological and
semantic representations held in WM (reducing the difference between
memory for competitors vs. controls) without attenuating, and perhaps
even increasing, stimulus-driven attentional processing of the visual
objects in the display. Indeed, given that the search display preceded the
onset of the target cue, there was a 500 ms period during which selective
attention to a particular object would have been unnecessary and even
counterproductive.
Bilinguals' better memory for unrelated controls may also reflect a
more general enhancement in episodic memory encoding (Kerrigan,
Thomas, Bright, & Filippi, 2017; Schroeder & Marian, 2012; Wodniecka
et al., 2010). Schroeder and Marian (2012) observed that incidental
memory for previously-seen pictures was greater among older bilinguals
compared to monolinguals, which increased with earlier second lan
guage acquisition and longer durations of dual-language use. Consistent
with neuroimaging studies implicating frontal lobe activity in episodic
encoding (Blumenfeld & Ranganath, 2007; Buckner, Kelley, & Petersen,
1999; Kapur et al., 1994), the authors found that memory improved with
better executive functioning, which was likewise greater among bi
linguals than monolinguals. It may therefore be the case that the overall
pattern observed in the present study stemmed from a combination of
reduced competition from internal representations and enhanced
encoding of visual stimuli for bilinguals compared to monolinguals.
Importantly, while we observed that the cumulative impact of
bilingualism could be detected even when variability in language
background was reduced to a coarse categorical metric (monolinguals
vs. bilinguals), a more nuanced approach was necessary to detect the
contributions of different forms and degrees of bilingual experience.
When bilingualism was instead treated as a multidimensional contin
uous variable, we observed that individual differences in language
experience modulated the influence of semantic and phonological
competition on memory, with variable effects depending on the type of
competition, as well as the type of experience. Earlier and greater
bilingual proficiency was associated with a reduced effect of semantic
competition on memory (i.e., smaller differences between competitors
and controls), while greater bilingual immersion reduced the impact of
phonological competition on memory. Similar patterns were observed
when analyses were restricted to those with dual-language experience,
indicating that individual differences among bilinguals predict effects of
competition on memory, which are obscured by a categorical treatment
of monolinguals vs. bilinguals. Together, these findings suggest that in
order to obtain a more complete picture of how bilingualism influences
cross-domain cognitive processes, we must account for the demands
associated with particular tasks, as well as for specific language
experiences.
Interestingly, the impact of bilingualism also varied depending on
whether targets were cued by words or sounds, with relatively stronger
effects of bilingualism on memory for phonological competitors in
response to sounds and memory for semantic competitors (relative to
controls) in response to words. While greater cognitive control could
presumably reduce the effects of competition in response to either words
or sounds, the impact of either more distributed or weaker activation of
competing representations would be expected to differ depending on the
interaction between bottom-up inputs and top-down experiences. For
phonological competition in response to sounds, more extensive im
mersion and exposure to multiple languages may increase the likelihood
that items in a visual display will automatically activate corresponding

linguistic labels in not only English (e.g., "cat," "cast," "fork," "apple"),
but also other known languages (e.g., "gato," "enyesado," "tenedor,"
"manzana"). Consequently, phonological relationships that exist in one
language (e.g., cat-cast) may be less salient overall, resulting in a smaller
effect of phonological overlap on memory. It may be the case, however,
that the overt presentation of an English label could boost the salience of
English competitors (relative to cross-linguistic competitors), thereby
attenuating the effect of bilingual immersion when targets are cued by
words rather than sounds. In the case of semantic competition in
response to words, because the identification of a picture based on a
spoken word (e.g., "dog") requires access to linguistic representations
associated with the auditory and visual stimuli, the activation of a
greater number of lexical candidates (both within and across languages)
by those with advanced bilingual proficiency could reduce semantic
integration and the subsequent impact on memory. On the other hand,
because it is not necessary to access linguistic labels in order to identify a
picture based on a sound (e.g., <woof>), bilingual experience may have
a lesser effect on how semantic competitors are processed and remem
bered. A similar pattern was observed by Friesen et al. (2016), who
found that, compared to monolinguals, bilinguals had reduced semantic
integration of related pictures (e.g., a fly and a bee) when the visual
stimuli appeared concurrently with a verbal target cue (e.g., "fly"), but
not when the pictures were presented without the verbal cue.
In addition to potential mechanisms attributable to the activation of
competing representations, the present findings may reflect effects of
different forms of bilingual experience on the ability to inhibit taskirrelevant representations. Given that participants consistently heard
the target cue as a single type of input (either words or sounds), it would
be reasonable to expect that participants would have activated the taskrelevant features of the visual objects during the display preview more
(i.e., phonological representations in the word condition and semantic
representations in the sound condition). While bilingualism has already
been shown to enhance control over irrelevant representations held in
memory (e.g., Chabal, Schroeder, & Marian, 2015; Friesen et al., 2015;
Hernandez et al., 2012; Kuipers & Westphal, 2021; Macnamara &
Conway, 2014), the effects observed in the sound condition may indicate
that the ability to inhibit task-irrelevant representations (in this case,
object labels) is particularly facilitated by longer immersion in bilingual
environments. Such an effect would be consistent with prior work
indicating that greater experience in dual-language contexts and more
frequent language-switching facilitates the ability to suppress irrelevant
goals when switching tasks (i.e., task-set reconfiguration, Gullifer et al.,
2018; Hartanto & Yang, 2016). Similarly, the reduced competition in the
semantic-word condition with greater dual-language proficiency and
acquisition could reflect an enhanced ability to suppress task-irrelevant
information (in this case, semantic features), which would be largely
consistent with previous findings that higher bilingual proficiency and
earlier bilingual acquisition can enhance reactive inhibitory control (e.
g., such as in AX-CPT (Beatty-Martinez et al., 2020; Gullifer et al., 2018),
Simon (Kousaie et al., 2017) and Flanker tasks (Chung-Fat-Yim et al.,
2020; Luk, De Sa, & Bialystok, 2011)).
Together, our findings indicate that in addition to the competition
that can arise from co-activations of overlapping linguistic, semantic,
and visual representations, specific experiences with more than one
language influence the extent to which competition during visual search
impacts subsequent memory. In addition to obtaining performance
measures of domain-general cognitive control and lexical access, future
research incorporating methods such as neuroimaging and ERP (Cansino
& Trejo-Morales, 2008; Duarte, Ranganath, Winward, Hayward, &
Knight, 2004; Gullifer et al., 2018; Guo et al., 2006; Ranganath et al.,
2004; Wilding & Sharpe, 2003), eye-tracking ( Chanon & Hopfinger,
2008; Holm & Mantyla, 2007; Laeng & Teodorescu, 2002; Pertzov,
Avidan, & Zohary, 2009; Ryan, Hannula, & Cohen, 2007; van der Linde,
Rajashekar, Bovik, & Cormack, 2009) and measurements of pupillary
responses (Goldinger, He, & Papesh, 2009; Kafkas & Montaldi, 2011)
could further elucidate the perceptual, attentional, and memory
11

V. Marian et al.

Brain and Language 222 (2021) 105012

Fig. A1. Hierarchical cluster analysis of language variables. The first group included measures of age and manner of acquisition, language proficiency, and informal
contexts of exposure (e.g., family, friends). The second group included measures of immersion duration (e.g., years in an English-speaking country) and the third
group captured formal contexts of exposure (e.g., language learning platforms).
Table A1
Phonological and Semantic Stimulus Sets.
Competition Type

Set

Target

Competitor

Control

Phonological

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15

cat
clock
bell
fly
kiss
whistle
frog
glass
hammer
lighter
scissors
duck
drum
sprinkler
gun
cow
dog
bees
typewriter
sheep
toilet
chicken
rain
door
sword
jackhammer
owl
lawnmower
chainsaw
soda can

cast
cloud
belt
flag
king
whip
freezer
glue
handcuffs
lightning
syringe
dump truck
drawer
spear
gutter
goat
fox
ant
computer
horse
outhouse
turkey
snow
window
bow
drill
eagle
rake
ax
jar

iron
lightbulb
puzzle
grapes
dress
key
tire
arrow
envelope
helmet
book
ear
bear
diaper
shoulder
gum
flashlight
slippers
wreath
tent
weather
tweezers
mermaid
wrench
diver
bull
fish
rock
shield
web

Semantic

Table A2
Effects of Auditory Input, Competition Type, Language Group and Object on
Recognition Accuracy.
Intercept
Object1
Object2
CompetitionType
Input
Group
Object1:CompType
Object2:CompType
Object1:Input
Object2:Input
CompType:Input
Object1:Group
Object2:Group
CompType:Group
Input:Group
Object1:CompType:Input
Object2:CompType:Input
Object1:CompType:Group
Object2:CompType:Group
Object1:Input:Group
Object2:Input:Group
CompType:Input:Group
Object1:CompType:Input:Group
Object2:CompType:Input:Group

Estimate

SE

z

p

4.97
- 9.70
- 1.71
2.40
- 1.80
1.66
- 3.80
- 0.74
5.70
0.18
- 2.83
- 2.92
0.57
1.79
- 3.07
7.93
1.12
- 4.64
0.14
9.32
- 0.18
- 4.00
12.54
- 0.26

0.79
2.30
0.34
1.22
1.33
1.02
3.63
0.67
3.85
0.22
2.45
2.86
0.22
1.76
2.07
7.31
0.32
5.24
0.32
5.81
0.44
3.62
10.79
0.64

6.30
- 4.22
- 4.95
1.96
- 1.35
1.63
- 1.05
- 1.11
1.48
0.83
- 1.15
- 1.02
2.59
1.02
- 1.49
1.09
3.50
- 0.89
0.44
1.60
- 0.42
- 1.11
1.16
- 0.40

<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
0.049
0.177
0.104
0.296
0.269
0.139
0.405
0.249
0.308
0.010
0.308
0.138
0.278
<0.001
0.376
0.657
0.109
0.677
0.269
0.245
0.689

***
***
***
*

**

***

Note. The maximally-converging generalized linear mixed-effects model on
recognition accuracy included fixed effects of Auditory Input (Sounds: - 0.5 vs.
Words: +0.5), Competition Type (Phonological: - 0.5 vs. Semantic: +0.5),
Language Group (Monolinguals: - 0.67 vs. Bilinguals: +0.33), Object (contrast
1: Target: - 0.67 vs. Competitors and Controls + 0.33; contrast 2: Competitors:
- 0.5 vs. Controls: +0.5), and all interactions, as well as random intercepts for
Participant and Set plus a by-participant random slope for Object and by-set
random slopes for Object and Input.

processes mediating the effects of bilingualism on memory.
4.3. Conclusion

the two languages, less frequent exposure to items in a single language,
and differential deployment of cognitive control.
In conclusion, the present study demonstrates that semantic and
phonological features associated with the objects that we see can impact
not only what we attend to in the moment, but also what we remember
after the fact. The degree to which our memories are influenced by
related information varies as a function of our immediate multisensory
environment interacting with our language experiences accumulated
over a lifetime.

The present study found that related meanings and labels of objects
in a visual search can influence subsequent memory for what was pre
viously seen. We additionally provide evidence that the impact of form
and meaning overlap on visual memory differs as a function of input and
of individual differences, with effects varying depending on whether
targets of the search are cued by a word or a sound, and whether in
dividuals engaged in the search come equipped with bilingual abilities
and experiences. Specifically, bilingualism was found to attenuate the
influence of phonological and semantic overlap on memory, which we
suggest may be due to a more distributed network of activation across
12

V. Marian et al.

Brain and Language 222 (2021) 105012

Table A3
Effects of Auditory Input, Competition Type, and Individual Difference Measures on Competition (Accuracy for Competitors - Controls).
Estimate
Intercept
Input
CompetitionType
Dual_Proficiency_Acquisition
Single_Exposure
Dual_Exposure_Informal
Dual_Immersion_General
Dual_Immersion_Family
Dual_Immersion_Country
Dual_Exposure_Acqusition_Formal
Input:CompType
Input:D_Prof_Acq
CompType:D_Prof_Acq
Input:S_Exp
CompType:S_Exp
Input:D_Exp_Inf
CompType:D_Exp_Inf
Input:D_Imm_Gen
CompType:D_Imm_Gen
Input:D_Imm_Fam
CompType:D_Imm_Fam
Input:D_Imm_Con
CompType:D_Imm_Coun
Input:D_Exp_Acq_For
CompType:D_Exp_Acq_For
Input:CompType:D_Prof_Acq
Input:CompType:S_Exp
Input:CompType:D_Exp_Inf
Input:CompType:D_Imm_Gen
Input:CompType:D_Imm_Fam
Input:CompType:D_Imm_Coun
Input:CompType:D_Exp_Acq_For

-
-
-

-
-
-
-

-
-
-

-
-
-
-
-

0.17
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.00
0.00
0.02
0.30
0.00
0.04
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.08
0.01
0.03
0.09
0.05
0.04
0.07
0.06
0.02
0.17
0.05
0.11
0.05
0.03

SE

df

0.02
0.05
0.04
0.01
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.02
0.09
0.02
0.01
0.04
0.03
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.03
0.06
0.05
0.08
0.07
0.04
0.04
0.03
0.06
0.07
0.07
0.10
0.15
0.07

36
36
36
36
36
36
36
36
36
36
36
36
36
36
36
36
36
36
36
36
36
36
36
36
36
36
36
36
36
36
36
36

t

-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-

-
-
-

-
-
-
-
-

p
6.65
0.07
0.19
1.16
1.20
0.99
0.82
0.14
0.04
1.01
3.38
0.14
2.53
0.04
0.20
0.33
0.19
0.54
2.42
0.27
0.54
1.06
0.72
1.07
1.84
1.92
0.35
2.29
0.75
1.07
0.32
0.47

<0.001
0.942
0.854
0.253
0.238
0.329
0.419
0.888
0.969
0.318
0.002
0.892
0.016
0.969
0.842
0.743
0.849
0.593
0.021
0.791
0.590
0.295
0.476
0.292
0.074
0.062
0.729
0.028
0.461
0.292
0.748
0.640

***

**
*

*

.
.
*

Note. The maximally converging linear mixed-effects model for competition included fixed effects of Auditory Input (Sounds: - 0.5 vs. Words: +0.5), Competition Type
(Phonological: - 0.5 vs. Semantic: +0.5), Dual-Language Proficiency/Acquisition (D_Prof_Acq), Single-Language Exposure (S_Exp), Dual-Language Exposure: Informal
(D_Exp_Inf), Dual-Language Immersion: General (D_Imm_Gen), Dual-Language Immersion: Family (D_Imm_Fam), Dual-Language Immersion: Country (D_Imm_Coun),
Dual-Language Exposure/Acquisition: Formal (D_Exp_Acq_For), and all two- and three-way interactions, plus a random intercept for Participant.

5. Ethics approval and consent to participate

Barr, D. J., Levy, R., Scheepers, C., & Tily, H. J. (2013). Random effects structure for
confirmatory hypothesis testing: Keep it maximal. Journal of Memory and Language,
68(3), 255-278.
Bartolotti, J., Schroeder, S. R., Hayakawa, S., Rochanavibhata, S., Chen, P., & Marian, V.
(2020). Listening to speech and non-speech sounds activates phonological and
semantic knowledge differently. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 73(8),
1135-1149.
Bates, D., Maechler, M., Bolker, B., & Walker, S. (2015). Fitting linear mixed-effects
models using lme4. Journal of Statistical Software, 67, 1-48.
Beatty-Martinez, A. L., & Dussias, P. E. (2017). Bilingual experience shapes language
processing: Evidence from codeswitching. Journal of Memory and Language, 95,
173-189.
Beatty-Martinez, A. L., Navarro-Torres, C. A., Dussias, P. E., Bajo, M. T., Guzzardo
Tamargo, R. E., & Kroll, J. F. (2020). Interactional context mediates the
consequences of bilingualism for language and cognition. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 46(6), 1022-1047.
Beck, M. R., Peterson, M. S., Boot, W. R., Vomela, M., & Kramer, A. F. (2006). Explicit
memory for rejected distractors during visual search. Visual Cognition, 14(2),
150-174.
Becker, S. I. (2011). Determinants of dwell time in visual search: Similarity or perceptual
difficulty? PLOS ONE, 6(3), e17740.
Bedore, L. M., Pena, E. D., Summers, C. L., Boerger, K. M., Resendiz, M. D., Greene, K., ...
Gillam, R. B. (2012). The measure matters: Language dominance profiles across
measures in Spanish-English bilingual children. Bilingualism, 15(3), 616-629.
Bialystok, E., Craik, F. I. M., Green, D. W., & Gollan, T. H. (2009). Bilingual minds.
Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 10(3), 89-129.
Bialystok, E., Craik, F., & Luk, G. (2008). Cognitive control and lexical access in younger
and older bilinguals. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 34(4), 859-873.
Blumenfeld, H. K., & Marian, V. (2007). Constraints on parallel activation in bilingual
spoken language processing: Examining proficiency and lexical status using
eyetracking. Language and Cognitive Processes, 22(5), 633-660.
Blumenfeld, H. K., & Marian, V. (2011). Bilingualism influences inhibitory control in
auditory comprehension. Cognition, 118(2), 245-257.
Blumenfeld, R. S., & Ranganath, C. (2007). Prefrontal cortex and long-term memory
encoding: An integrative review of findings from neuropsychology and
neuroimaging. The Neuroscientist, 13(3), 280-291.
Bonilha, L., Hillis, A. E., Hickok, G., Den Ouden, D. B., Rorden, C., & Fridriksson, J.
(2017). Temporal lobe networks supporting the comprehension of spoken words.
Brain, 140(9), 2370-2380.

Research reported in this publication was approved by the Institu
tional Review Board at Northwestern University (STU00023477).
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.
Appendix
See Fig. A1 and Tables A1-A3.
References
Allopenna, P. D., Magnuson, J. S., & Tanenhaus, M. K. (1998). Tracking the time course
of spoken word recognition using eye movements: Evidence for continuous mapping
models. Journal of Memory and Language, 38(4), 419-439.
Anderson, J. A., Hawrylewicz, K., & Bialystok, E. (2020). Who is bilingual? Snapshots
across the lifespan. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 23(5), 929-937.
Anderson, J. A., Mak, L., Chahi, A. K., & Bialystok, E. (2018). The language and social
background questionnaire: Assessing degree of bilingualism in a diverse population.
Behavior Research Methods, 50(1), 250-263.
Baayen, R.H. (2011) Package `languageR'. Data sets and functions with Analyzing
Linguistic Data: A practical introduction to statistics. Available at: http://cran.r-pro
ject.org/web/packages/languageR/languageR.pdf.
Baayen, R. H. (2008). Analyzing Linguistic Data: A Practical Introduction to Statistics Using
R. Cambridge University Press.
Bahle, B., Thayer, D. D., Mordkoff, J. T., & Hollingworth, A. (2020). The architecture of
working memory: Features from multiple remembered objects produce parallel,
coactive guidance of attention in visual search. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 149(5), 967-983.

13

V. Marian et al.

Brain and Language 222 (2021) 105012

Bravo, M. J., & Farid, H. (2014). Informative cues can slow search: The cost of matching
a specific template. Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics, 76(1), 32-39.
Brysbaert, M., & New, B. (2009). Moving beyond Kucera and Francis: A critical
evaluation of current word frequency norms and the introduction of a new and
improved word frequency measure for American English. Behavior Research Methods,
41(4), 977-990.
Buckner, R. L., Kelley, W. M., & Petersen, S. E. (1999). Frontal cortex contributes to
human memory formation. Nature Neuroscience, 2(4), 311-314.
Canseco-Gonzalez, E., Brehm, L., Brick, C. A., Brown-Schmidt, S., Fischer, K., &
Wagner, K. (2010). Carpet or Carcel: The effect of age of acquisition and language
mode on bilingual lexical access. Language and Cognitive Processes, 25(5), 669-705.
Cansino, S., & Trejo-Morales, P. (2008). Neurophysiology of successful encoding and
retrieval of source memory. Cognitive, Affective & Behavioral Neuroscience, 8(1),
85-98.
Castelhano, M., & Henderson, J. (2005). Incidental visual memory for objects in scenes.
Visual Cognition, 12(6), 1017-1040.
Cavanna, A. E., & Trimble, M. R. (2005). The precuneus: a review of its functional
anatomy and behavioural correlates. Brain, 129(3), 564-583.
Chabal, S., & Marian, V. (2015). Speakers of different languages process the visual world
differently. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 144(3), 539-550.
Chabal, S., Schroeder, S. R., & Marian, V. (2015). Audio-visual object search is changed
by bilingual experience. Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics, 77(8), 2684-2693.
Chanon, V. W., & Hopfinger, J. B. (2008). Memory's grip on attention: The influence of
item memory on the allocation of attention. Visual Cognition, 16(2-3), 325-340.
Chelazzi, L., Duncan, J., Miller, E. K., & Desimone, R. (1998). Responses of neurons in
inferior temporal cortex during memory-guided visual search. Journal of
Neurophysiology, 80(6), 2918-2940.
Chen, Y.-C., & Spence, C. (2010). When hearing the bark helps to identify the dog:
Semantically-congruent sounds modulate the identification of masked pictures.
Cognition, 114(3), 389-404.
Chen, Y. C., & Spence, C. (2011). Crossmodal semantic priming by naturalistic sounds
and spoken words enhances visual sensitivity. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 37(5), 1554-1568.
Chun, M. M., & Jiang, Y. (1998). Contextual cueing: Implicit learning and memory of
visual context guides spatial attention. Cognitive Psychology, 36(1), 28-71.
Chun, M. M., & Jiang, Y. (1999). Top-down attentional guidance based on implicit
learning of visual covariation. Psychological Science, 10(4), 360-365.
Chun, M., M., & Nakayama, K. (2000). On the functional role of implicit visual memory
for the adaptive deployment of attention across scenes. Visual Cognition, 7(1-3),
65-81.
Chun, M. M., & Phelps, E. A. (1999). Memory deficits for implicit contextual information
in amnesic subjects with hippocampal damage. Nature Neuroscience, 2(9), 844-847.
Chung-Fat-Yim, A., Sorge, G. B., & Bialystok, E. (2020). Continuous effects of
bilingualism and attention on Flanker task performance. Bilingualism: Language and
Cognition, 23(5), 1106-1111.
Coltheart, M. (1981). The MRC psycholinguistic database. The Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 33(4), 497-505.
Costa, A., Hernandez, M., & Sebastian-Galles, N. (2008). Bilingualism aids conflict
resolution: Evidence from the ANT task. Cognition, 106(1), 59-86.
Cowan, N. (1998). Attention and memory: An integrated framework. Oxford University
Press.
Craik, F. I. M., & Lockhart, R. S. (1972). Levels of processing: A framework for memory
research. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 11(6), 671-684.
Dahan, D., Magnuson, J. S., & Tanenhaus, M. K. (2001). Time course of frequency effects
in spoken-word recognition: Evidence from eye movements. Cognitive Psychology, 42
(4), 317-367.
Davis, C. J., & Perea, M. (2005). BuscaPalabras: A program for deriving orthographic and
phonological neighborhood statistics and other psycholinguistic indices in Spanish.
Behavior Research Methods, 37(4), 665-671.
DeLuca, V., Rothman, J., Bialystok, E., & Pliatsikas, C. (2019). Redefining bilingualism as
a spectrum of experiences that differentially affects brain structure and function.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 116
(15), 7565-7574.
Desimone, R., & Duncan, J. (1995). Neural mechanisms of selective visual attention.
Annual Review of Neuroscience, 18(1), 193-222.
Duarte, A., Ranganath, C., Winward, L., Hayward, D., & Knight, R. T. (2004). Dissociable
neural correlates for familiarity and recollection during the encoding and retrieval of
pictures. Cognitive Brain Research, 18(3), 255-272.
Duncan, J., & Humphreys, G. (1989). Visual search and stimulus similarity. Psychological
Review, 96(3), 433-458.
Friesen, D. C., Chung-Fat-Yim, A., & Bialystok, E. (2016). Lexical selection differences
between monolingual and bilingual listeners. Brain and Language, 152, 1-13.
Friesen, D. C., Latman, V., Calvo, A., & Bialystok, E. (2015). Attention during visual
search: The benefit of bilingualism. International Journal of Bilingualism, 19(6),
693-702.
Giesbrecht, B., Sy, J. L., & Guerin, S. A. (2013). Both memory and attention systems
contribute to visual search for targets cued by implicitly learned context. Vision
Research, 85, 80-89.
Goldinger, S. D., He, Y., & Papesh, M. H. (2009). Deficits in cross-race face learning:
Insights from eye movements and pupillometry. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 35(5), 1105-1122.
Gollan, T. H., Montoya, R. I., & Werner, G. A. (2002). Semantic and letter fluency in
Spanish-English bilinguals. Neuropsychology, 16(4), 562-576.
Gollan, T. H., Montoya, R. I., Cera, C., & Sandoval, T. C. (2008). More use almost always
means a smaller frequency effect: Aging, bilingualism, and the weaker links
hypothesis. Journal of Memory and Language, 58(3), 787-814.

Gollan, T. H., Slattery, T. J., Goldenberg, D., Van Assche, E., Duyck, W., & Rayner, K.
(2011). Frequency drives lexical access in reading but not in speaking: The
frequency-lag hypothesis. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 140(2),
186-209.
Green, D. W., & Abutalebi, J. (2013). Language control in bilinguals: The adaptive
control hypothesis. Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 25(5), 515-553.
Greene, A. J., Gross, W. L., Elsinger, C. L., & Rao, S. M. (2007). Hippocampal
differentiation without recognition: An fMRI analysis of the contextual cueing task.
Learning & Memory, 14(8), 548-553.
Grundy, J. G., & Timmer, K. (2017). Bilingualism and working memory capacity: A
comprehensive meta-analysis. Second Language Research, 33(3), 325-340.
Guevara Pinto, J. D., Papesh, M. H., & Hout, M. C. (2020). The detail is in the difficulty:
Challenging search facilitates rich incidental object encoding. Memory & Cognition,
48(7), 1214-1233.
Gullifer, J. W., Chai, X. J., Whitford, V., Pivneva, I., Baum, S., Klein, D., & Titone, D.
(2018). Bilingual experience and resting-state brain connectivity: Impacts of L2 age
of acquisition and social diversity of language use on control networks.
Neuropsychologia, 117, 123-134.
Gullifer, J. W., Kousaie, S., Gilbert, A. C., Grant, A., Giroud, N., Coulter, K., ... Titone, D.
(2021). Bilingual language experience as a multidimensional spectrum: Associations
with objective and subjective language proficiency. Applied Psycholinguistics, 42(2),
245-278.
Gunter, T. C., Wagner, S., & Friederici, A. D. (2003). Working memory and lexical
ambiguity resolution as revealed by ERPs: A difficult case for activation theories.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 15(5), 643-657.
Gunter, T. C., Wagner, S., & Friederici, A. D. (2003). Working memory and lexical
ambiguity resolution as revealed by ERPs: A difficult case for activation theories.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 15(5), 643-657.
Guo, C., Duan, L.i., Li, W., & Paller, K. A. (2006). Distinguishing source memory and item
memory: Brain potentials at encoding and retrieval. Brain Research, 1118(1),
142-154.
Harrell, F. R., Jr. (2017). Hmisc: Harrell Miscellaneous. R package version 4.0-3. https://
CRAN.R-project.org/package=Hmisc.
Hartanto, A., & Yang, H. (2016). Disparate bilingual experiences modulate taskswitching advantages: A diffusion-model analysis of the effects of interactional
context on switch costs. Cognition, 150, 10-19.
Hernandez, M., Costa, A., & Humphreys, G. W. (2012). Escaping capture: Bilingualism
modulates distraction from working memory. Cognition, 122(1), 37-50.
Hickok, G., & Poeppel, D. (2004). Dorsal and ventral streams: A framework for
understanding aspects of the functional anatomy of language. Cognition, 92(1-2),
67-99.
Holcomb, P. J., & Mcpherson, W. B. (1994). Event-related brain potentials reflect
semantic priming in an object decision task. Brain and Cognition, 24(2), 259-276.
Hollingworth, A., & Henderson, J. M. (2002). Accurate visual memory for previously
attended objects in natural scenes. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 28(1), 113-136.
Holm, L., & Mantyla, T. (2007). Memory for scenes: Refixations reflect retrieval. Memory
& Cognition, 35(7), 1664-1674.
Horowitz, T. S., & Wolfe, J. M. (1998). Visual search has no memory. Nature, 394(6693),
575-577.
Hout, M. C., & Goldinger, S. D. (2010). Learning in repeated visual search. Attention,
Perception, & Psychophysics, 72(5), 1267-1282.
Hout, M. C., & Goldinger, S. D. (2012). Incidental learning speeds visual search by
lowering response thresholds, not by improving efficiency: evidence from eye
movements. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance,
38(1), 90-112.
Huang, L., Holcombe, A. O., & Pashler, H. (2004). Repetition priming in visual search:
Episodic retrieval, not feature priming. Memory & Cognition, 32(1), 12-20.
Huettig, F., & Janse, E. (2016). Individual differences in working memory and processing
speed predict anticipatory spoken language processing in the visual world. Language,
Cognition and Neuroscience, 31(1), 80-93.
Huettig, F., & McQueen, J. M. (2007). The tug of war between phonological, semantic
and shape information in language-mediated visual search. Journal of Memory and
Language, 57(4), 460-482.
Huettig, F., Rommers, J., & Meyer, A. S. (2011). Using the visual world paradigm to
study language processing: A review and critical evaluation. Acta Psychologica, 137
(2), 151-171.
Iordanescu, L., Grabowecky, M., & Suzuki, S. (2011). Object-based auditory facilitation
of visual search for pictures and words with frequent and rare targets. Acta
Psychologica, 137(2), 252-259.
Huettig, F., Olivers, C., & Hartsuiker, R. (2011). Looking, language, and memory:
Bridging research from the visual world and visual search paradigms. Acta
Psychologica, 137(2), 138-150.
Intraub, H. (1984). Conceptual masking: The effects of subsequent visual events on
memory for pictures. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 10(1), 115-125.
Iordanescu, L., Grabowecky, M., Franconeri, S., Theeuwes, J., & Suzuki, S. (2010).
Characteristic sounds make you look at target objects more quickly. Attention,
Perception, & Psychophysics, 72(7), 1736-1741.
Itti, L., & Koch, C. (2000). A saliency-based search mechanism for overt and covert shifts
of visual attention. Vision Research, 40(10-12), 1489-1506.
Itti, L., & Koch, C. (2001). Computational modelling of visual attention. Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 2(3), 194-203.
Kafkas, A., & Montaldi, D. (2011). Recognition memory strength is predicted by pupillary
responses at encoding while fixation patterns distinguish recollection from
familiarity. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 64(10), 1971-1989.

14

V. Marian et al.

Brain and Language 222 (2021) 105012

Kapur, S., Craik, F. I., Tulving, E., Wilson, A. A., Houle, S., & Brown, G. M. (1994).
Neuroanatomical correlates of encoding in episodic memory: Levels of processing
effect. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 91(6), 2008-2011.
Kasper, R. W., Grafton, S. T., Eckstein, M. P., & Giesbrecht, B. (2015). Multimodal
neuroimaging evidence linking memory and attention systems during visual search
cued by context. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1339(1), 176-189.
Kerrigan, L., Thomas, M. S., Bright, P., & Filippi, R. (2017). Evidence of an advantage in
visuo-spatial memory for bilingual compared to monolingual speakers. Bilingualism:
Language and Cognition, 20(3), 602-612.
Kerzel, D. (2019). The precision of attentional selection is far worse than the precision of
the underlying memory representation. Cognition, 186, 20-31.
Kotz, S. A. (1997). Bilingual memory revisited: An electrophysiological investigation of
lexical and semantic representations in fluent bilinguals. Unpublished Ph.D.
Dissertation. Tufts University.
Kousaie, S., Chai, X. J., Sander, K. M., & Klein, D. (2017). Simultaneous learning of two
languages from birth positively impacts intrinsic functional connectivity and
cognitive control. Brain and Cognition, 117, 49-56.
Kuipers, J. R., & Westphal, K. H. (2021). Auditory processing and high task demands
facilitate the bilingual executive control advantage in young adults. Journal of
Neurolinguistics, 57, 100954. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneuroling.2020.100954.
Kutas, M., & Federmeier, K. D. (2011). Thirty years and counting: Finding meaning in the
N400 component of the event-related brain potential (ERP). Annual Review of
Psychology, 62(1), 621-647.
Laeng, B., & Teodorescu, D.-S. (2002). Eye scanpaths during visual imagery reenact those
of perception of the same visual scene. Cognitive Science, 26(2), 207-231.
Lavelle, M., Alonso, D., Luria, R., & Drew, T. (2021). Visual working memory load plays
limited, to no role in encoding distractor objects during visual search. Visual
Cognition, 29(5), 288-309.
Li, P., Sepanski, S., & Zhao, X. (2006). Language history questionnaire: A web-based
interface for bilingual research. Behavior Research Methods, 38(2), 202-210.
Loftus, G. R. (1972). Eye fixations and recognition memory for pictures. Cognitive
Psychology, 3(4), 525-551.
Luce, P. A., & Pisoni, D. B. (1998). Recognizing spoken words: The neighborhood
activation model. Ear and Hearing, 19(1), 1-36.
Luk, G., & Bialystok, E. (2013). Bilingualism is not a categorical variable: Interaction
between language proficiency and usage. Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 25(5),
605-621.
Luk, G., De Sa, E., & Bialystok, E. (2011). Is there a relation between onset age of
bilingualism and enhancement of cognitive control? Bilingualism: Language and
Cognition, 14(4), 588-595.
Lupyan, G. (2007). The Label Feedback Hypothesis: Linguistic Influences on Visual
Processing (Doctoral dissertation, Carnegie Mellon University).
Lupyan, G. (2008). The conceptual grouping effect: Categories matter (and named
categories matter more). Cognition, 108(2), 566-577.
Lupyan, G. (2012). Linguistically modulated perception and cognition: The labelfeedback hypothesis. Frontiers in Psychology, 3, 54.
Lupyan, G., & Spivey, M. J. (2010). Redundant spoken labels facilitate perception of
multiple items. Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics, 72(8), 2236-2253.
Macnamara, B. N., & Conway, A. R. A. (2014). Novel evidence in support of the bilingual
advantage: Influences of task demands and experience on cognitive control and
working memory. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 21(2), 520-525.
Marian, V., & Hayakawa, S. (2021). Measuring bilingualism: The quest for a bilingualism
quotient. Applied Psycholinguistics, 42(2), 527-548.
Marian, V., & Spivey, M. (2003a). Competing activation in bilingual language processing:
Within-and between-language competition. Bilingualism Language and Cognition, 6
(2), 97-115.
Marian, V., & Spivey, M. (2003b). Comparing bilingual and monolingual processing of
competing lexical items. Applied Psycholinguistics, 24(2), 173-193.
Marian, V., Bartolotti, J., Chabal, S., Shook, A., & White, S. A. (2012). CLEARPOND:
Cross-linguistic easyaccess resource for phonological and orthographic
neighborhood densities. PloS one, 7(8), e43230.
Marian, V., Blumenfeld, H. K., & Kaushanskaya, M. (2007). The Language Experience and
Proficiency Questionnaire (LEAP-Q): Assessing language profiles in bilinguals and
multilinguals. Journal of Speech Language and Hearing Research, 50(4), 940-967.
McClelland, J. L., & Elman, J. L. (1986). The TRACE model of speech perception.
Cognitive Psychology, 18(1), 1-86.
McQueen, J. M., & Cutler, A. (2001). Spoken word access processes: An introduction.
Language and Cognitive Processes, 16(5-6), 469-490.
Mercier, J., Pivneva, I., & Titone, D. (2014). Individual differences in inhibitory control
relate to bilingual spoken word processing. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 17
(1), 89-117.
Moscovitch, M., Nadel, L., Winocur, G., Gilboa, A., & Rosenbaum, R. S. (2006). The
cognitive neuroscience of remote episodic, semantic and spatial memory. Current
Opinion in Neurobiology, 16(2), 179-190.
Olson, I. R., Chun, M. M., & Allison, T. (2001). Contextual guidance of attention: Human
intracranial event-related potential evidence for feedback modulation in
anatomically early temporally late stages of visual processing. Brain, 124(7),
1417-1425.
Peelen, M. V., & Kastner, S. (2011). A neural basis for real-world visual search in human
occipitotemporal cortex. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108(29),
12125-12130.

Pertzov, Y., Avidan, G., & Zohary, E. (2009). Accumulation of visual information across
multiple fixations. Journal of Vision, 9(10).
Pliatsikas, C., DeLuca, V., Moschopoulou, E., & Saddy, J. D. (2017). Immersive
bilingualism reshapes the core of the brain. Brain Structure & Function, 222(4),
1785-1795.
R Core Team (2017). R: A language and environment for statistical computing. Vienna,
Austria: R Foundation for Statistical Computing. https://www.R-project.org/.
Potter, M. C., & Levy, E. I. (1969). Recognition memory for a rapid sequence of pictures.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 81(1), 10-15.
Ranganath, C., Yonelinas, A. P., Cohen, M. X., Dy, C. J., Tom, S. M., & D'Esposito, M.
(2004). Dissociable correlates of recollection and familiarity within the medial
temporal lobes. Neuropsychologia, 42(1), 2-13.
Richardson-Klavehn, A., & Gardiner, J. M. (1998). Depth-of-processing effects on
priming in stem completion: tests of the voluntary-contamination, conceptualprocessing, and lexical-processing hypotheses. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 24(3), 593-609.
Ryan, J. D., Hannula, D. E., & Cohen, N. J. (2007). The obligatory effects of memory on
eye movements. Memory, 15(5), 508-525.
Sabourin, L., Leclerc, J. C., Lapierre, M., Burkholder, M., & Brien, C. (2016). The
language background questionnaire in L2 research: teasing apart the variables. In
Proceedings of the 2016 annual conference of the Canadian Linguistic Association.
Salverda, A. P., & Altmann, G. (2011). Attentional capture of objects referred to by
spoken language. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 37(4), 1122-1133.
Schroeder, S. R., & Marian, V. (2012). A bilingual advantage for episodic memory in
older adults. Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 24(5), 591-601.
Sebastian-Galles, N., Marti, M. A., Carreiras, M., & Cuetos, F. (2000). LEXESP: Una base de
datos informatizada del espanol. Barcelona: Universitat de Barcelona.
Shore, D. I., & Klein, R. M. (2000). On the manifestations of memory in visual search.
Spatial Vision, 14(1), 59-76.
Sulpizio, S., Del Maschio, N., Del Mauro, G., Fedeli, D., & Abutalebi, J. (2019).
Bilingualism as a gradient measure modulates functional connectivity of language
and control networks. Neuroimage, 205, Article 116306.
Surrain, S., & Luk, G. (2019). Describing bilinguals: A systematic review of labels and
descriptions used in the literature between 2005-2015. Bilingualism: Language and
Cognition, 22(2), 401-415.
Szekely, A., Jacobsen, T., D'Amico, S., Devescovi, A., Andonova, E., Herron, D., ...
Bates, E. (2004). A new on-line resource for psycholinguistic studies. Journal of
Memory and Language, 51(2), 247-250.
Talsma, D., Senkowski, D., Soto-Faraco, S., & Woldorff, M. G. (2010). The multifaceted
interplay between attention and multi-sensory integration. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 14(9), 400-410.
Tanenhaus, M. K., Spivey-Knowlton, M. J., Eberhard, K. M., & Sedivy, J. C. (1995).
Integration of visual and linguistic information in spoken language comprehension.
Science, 268(5217), 1632-1634.
Thomas, M. D., & Williams, C. C. (2014). The target effect: Visual memory for unnamed
search targets. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 67(11), 2090-2104.
Tiv, M., Gullifer, J. W., Feng, R. Y., & Titone, D. (2020). Using network science to map
what Montreal bilinguals talk about across languages and communicative contexts.
Journal of Neurolinguistics, 56, 100913. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jneuroling.2020.100913.
van der Linde, I., Rajashekar, U., Bovik, A. C., & Cormack, L. K. (2009). Visual memory
for fixated regions of natural images dissociates attraction and recognition.
Perception, 38(8), 1152-1171.
van Loon, A. M., Olmos-Solis, K., & Olivers, C. N. (2017). Subtle eye movement metrics
reveal task-relevant representations prior to visual search. Journal of Vision, 17(6).
Vos, S. H., & Friederici, A. D. (2003). Intersentential syntactic context effects on
comprehension: The role of working memory. Cognitive Brain Research, 16(1),
111-122.
Wilding, E. L., & Sharpe, H. L. (2003). Episodic memory encoding and retrieval: Recent
insights from studies with event-related potentials. In A. Zani, & A. M. Proverbio
(Eds.), The cognitive electrophysiology of mind and brain (pp. 169-196). New York, NY:
Academic Press.
Williams, C. C. (2010). Not all visual memories are created equal. Visual Cognition, 18(2),
201-228.
Williams, C. C., Henderson, J. M., & Zacks, f. (2005). Incidental visual memory for targets
and distractors in visual search. Perception & Psychophysics, 67(5), 816-827.
Williams, C. C., Zacks, R. T., & Henderson, J. M. (2009). Age differences in what is
viewed and remembered in complex conjunction search. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 62(5), 946-966.
Wodniecka, Z., Craik, F. I. M., Luo, L., & Bialystok, E. (2010). Does bilingualism help
memory? Competing effects of verbal ability and executive control. International
Journal of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism, 13(5), 575-595.
Wolfe, J. M. (2020). Visual search: How do we find what we are looking for? Annual
Review of Vision Science, 6(1), 539-562.
Wolfe, J. M. (2021). Guided Search 6.0: An updated model of visual search. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 1-33.
Yee, E., & Sedivy, J. C. (2006). Eye movements to pictures reveal transient semantic
activation during spoken word recognition. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 32(1), 1-14.

15

