How do Spanish heritage speakers
in the US assign gender to English nouns
in Spanish-English code-switching?
The effect of noun canonicity and codeswitcher type
Nofiya Denbaum and Ana de Prada Perez
Indiana University | Maynooth University

Previous studies have observed different gender assignment strategies for
English nouns in Spanish-English code-switching (CS). However, these
studies have not investigated the role of noun gender canonicity of the
Spanish equivalent, they have only examined participants in bilingual
speaker mode, and most studies have not explored the role of bilingual language experience. The current study compares gender assignment by heritage speakers of Spanish in a monolingual speaker mode and a bilingual
speaker mode, considering the role of noun gender canonicity and CS experience. Results revealed a language mode effect, where participants used significantly more masculine determiners with the same feminine nouns in the
CS session than those in the Spanish monolingual session where they used a
feminine determiner. Further evidence of a language mode effect was found
in the effect of noun canonicity and bilingual language experience. Noun
canonicity was only significant in the Spanish monolingual session, where
participants used significantly more masculine determiners with noncanonical nouns. Bilingual language experience was only significant in the
CS session, where regular codeswitchers used more masculine default determiners than infrequent codeswitchers and non-codeswitchers, while in
Spanish-only, all these groups behaved similarly.
Keywords: code-switching, gender assignment, noun canonicity, EnglishSpanish, bilingual mode

1.

Introduction

Poplack (1980) defines CS as "the alternation of two languages within a single discourse, sentence or constituent" (pp. 583). As such, it is one communicative option
https://doi.org/10.1075/lab.19029.den | Published online: 25 May 2020
Linguistic Approaches to Bilingualism 11:6 (2021), pp. 846-872. ISSN 1879-9264 | EISSN 1879-9272
(c) John Benjamins Publishing Company

Gender assignment in Spanish-English code-switching

for bilinguals. However, it is important to note that just because CS is an option for
bilinguals, this does not mean that all bilinguals do indeed code-switch. Additionally, not all bilinguals who code-switch follow the same CS patterns and conventions (Beatty-Martinez, Valdes Kroff, & Dussias, 2018). Grosjean (2001) indicates
that bilinguals have several speaker modes depending on the context. He suggests
there is a continuum from a monolingual mode for one of the languages they speak
to a monolingual mode for the other language, through a bilingual mode for interactions with other bilinguals, where the activation of both languages could vary
depending on several factors. In this paper, we examine the speech of bilinguals
across two different sessions: a monolingual Spanish session and a CS session to
compare how the bilingual speaker mode may affect gender assignment.

Figure 1. Language mode continuum (Adapted from Grosjean, 2001)

As can be seen in Figure 1, Grosjean (2001) explored the activation of each language
across different modes. Figure 1 represents that, in this continuum, one of the bilingual's languages is always active while the other one may be more or less active (as
represented by the darkness of the boxes of Language B). In this paper, we examine
the difference in gender assignment in Spanish heritage speakers (HSs) between
their use in monolingual language mode vs. in bilingual language mode.1
1. In this study, heritage speaker refers to speakers who were either born in the US and grew
up speaking Spanish with at least one parent or who were born in Latin America and moved to
the US between the ages of 2 and 17 years of age. Of our participants, only one moved to the US
when she was 17, all others moved by the time they were 11.

847

848

Nofiya Denbaum and Ana de Prada Perez

Several studies have examined gender assignment of English nouns in
Spanish-English CS (Aaron, 2014; Beatty-Martinez & Dussias, 2017; Chaston,
1996; Clegg & Waltermire, 2009; Herring, Deuchar, Parafita Couto, & Quintanilla,
2010; Liceras, Fuertes, Perales, Perez-Tattam, & Spradlin, 2008; Montes-Alcala &
Shin, 2011; Otheguy & Lapidus, 2003; Poplack, Pousada, & Sankoff, 1982; Smead,
2000; Valdes Kroff, 2016). A goal of these studies has been to observe what strategies Spanish-English bilingual speakers use when assigning gender in CS to nouns
that do not have grammatical gender. Two of these strategies are the analogical criterion and the masculine default. The analogical criterion involves assigning the
same gender as the Spanish equivalent in the case of Spanish-English CS (e.g., la
cookie from la galleta). In contrast, the masculine default consists of assigning masculine gender regardless of the Spanish equivalent (e.g., el cookie from la galleta).
To the best of our knowledge, no study has investigated gender assignment with
the same participants in two different language sessions, comparing a monolingual mode with a bilingual mode, with the exception of Aaron (2014) and Clegg
and Waltermire (2009), although they did not use the same nouns in Spanish as in
CS. The first goal of the current study is to examine Spanish HS's gender assignment of English nouns in mixed DPs with Spanish determiners and compare it to
gender assignment of monolingual Spanish DPs with the same nouns by the same
individual, allowing us to isolate gender assignment that might be specific to CS
versus gender assignment in general, where HSs have been reported to differ from
monolinguals (Montrul, Foote, & Perpinan, 2008). To facilitate the isolation of a
bilingual mode effect, we compare gender assignment of the same exact noun in
monolingual Spanish and in Spanish-English CS.
Spanish speakers make use of grammatical gender cues in order to assign
gender to nouns. Previous studies have shown that in addition to relying on the
final phoneme -o and -a, Spanish speakers also exploit other grammatical gender cues, such as the phonemic make-up and syllable structure of the penultimate rhyme and final syllable (Eddington, 2002). Gender assignment in Spanish
has been reported to be variable in Spanish-English bilinguals, and several studies
have observed that noun gender transparency or canonicity, as in words where
the ending is associated with feminine gender (i.e., -a in Spanish, Bull, 1965 (e.g.,
casa)) or with masculine gender (i.e., -o in Spanish, Bull, 1965 (e.g., gato)) plays an
important role for Spanish HSs when assigning gender in monolingual Spanish
utterances (Montrul et al., 2008). Since noun gender canonicity has been reported
to have a large effect on gender assignment and agreement by HSs in monolingual
Spanish, it is worthwhile to investigate the effect of noun canonicity on gender
assignment of English nouns in Spanish-English CS. Therefore, a second goal of
the present study it to examine the effect of noun canonicity in both monolingual
Spanish and Spanish-English CS by the same group of bilinguals.

Gender assignment in Spanish-English code-switching

Another variable that is important to consider when examining codeswitched speech is the language experience of each bilingual. Previous research
regarding gender assignment in CS by Spanish HSs largely does not offer information about CS practices of the participants examined. Beatty-Martinez and
Dussias (2017), however, found significant differences between codeswitcher
(CSer) and non-CSer groups with respect to their CS behavior. Therefore, a final
goal of this study is to extend this research by investigating the role that CSer type
plays in gender assignment to English nouns in Spanish-English CS. In order to
further examine this variable, participants in this study were classified into three
different groups: regular CSers, infrequent CSers, and non-CSers. This study is
interested in examining two distinct aspects of CS practices: CS frequency and
CS gender assignment patterns. The distinction here is important because past
research has found that frequency of CS can at least to some extent explain different CS patterns (Beatty-Martinez & Dussias, 2019).
The present study examines 32 Spanish HSs' gender assignment of Spanish
nouns in monolingual language mode compared to gender assignment of English
nouns in Spanish-English bilingual language mode. Comparing the same individuals and the same nouns in two separate language modes serves as appropriate
benchmarks to observe whether the grammars of the two languages are converging due to contact or whether they remain separate (Torres Cacoullos & Travis,
2015). We aim to observe whether there is a difference between Spanish HSs' gender assignment in each of these language modes with attention to the effect of
noun canonicity and bilingual language experience.

2.

Review of the literature

This section discusses previous research on gender assignment in Spanish, both
monolingual and bilingual, as well as gender assignment to English nouns in CS.

2.1 Gender in monolingual and HS Spanish
In contrast to English, Spanish has grammatical gender, which is different from
biological gender (as in English). Grammatical gender is arbitrary, but it can coincide with natural gender (White, Valenzuela, Kozlowska-Macgregor, & Leung,
2004). In Spanish, all nouns have either masculine or feminine gender and any
determiners or adjectives that accompany nouns are obligatorily marked for gender of the head noun (Lew-Williams & Fernald, 2007; White et al., 2004).
Spanish nouns have distinct endings, e.g., -o, which is usually masculine, and
-a, which is feminine most of the time. However, there are several nouns that end

849

850

Nofiya Denbaum and Ana de Prada Perez

in -a that are masculine and there are some nouns that end in -o that are feminine
(White et al., 2004). Bull (1965) presents frequencies of feminine and masculine
gender with various endings included in the current study presented in Table 1
and Table 2.
Table 1. Frequency of feminine gender for relevant noun endings from Bull (1965)
Noun ending

Frequency feminine

-cion

100%

-a

98.9%

-d

97%

Table 2. Frequency of masculine gender for relevant noun endings from Bull (1965)
Noun ending

Frequency masculine

-o

99.7%

-r

99.2%

-l

96.6%

-n (except "-cion")

96.3%

-s (except "-sis")

92.7%

-j

91.6%

-e

89.2%

In Table 1 above, all the relevant feminine endings have high frequencies of occurring with feminine nouns. For the masculine endings, the highest frequencies of
occurrence with masculine nouns include -o, -r, -l, and -n. Another important
aspect of morphological gender in Spanish is canonicity. Canonical nouns end
in -o (masculine) or -a (feminine) while all others are considered non-canonical.
Canonicity has been shown to influence accuracy when identifying gender agreement in Spanish HSs (Montrul et al., 2008).
Spanish HSs sometimes have different patterns of gender assignment compared to monolinguals. HSs are consistently reported to be significantly less accurate with gender agreement and slower at identifying gender compared to more
balanced bilinguals (Montrul, De La Fuente, & Foote, 2014; van Osch, Hulk,
Sleeman, & van Suchtelen, 2014). This is expected as HSs tend to have less Spanish
input and the quality of that input is different from that of monolinguals. For
example, van Osch et al. (2014) proposed that quality of input played a role in
gender agreement accuracy for their HSs of Spanish in the Netherlands because
the HSs' gender agreement patterned very similarly to that of first-generation
immigrants.

Gender assignment in Spanish-English code-switching

HSs' gender assignment patterns are particularly different from that of monolinguals with feminine nouns, where they resort to the masculine default
(Alarcon, 2011; van Osch et al., 2014). It is not surprising that HSs overgeneralize
the masculine determiner given that their Spanish input is variable and occurs
in restricted environments (Montrul, 2012). However, it is also important to note
that even for monolingual speakers, there are large distributional asymmetries in
that masculine gender has default status (Beatty-Martinez & Dussias, 2019). Of
particular interest to our study, HSs have been found to be less accurate with noncanonical nouns than with canonical nouns in written comprehension and production as well as oral production and other experimental tasks (Alarcon, 2011;
Montrul et al., 2008; Montrul, De La Fuente, Davidson, and Foote, 2013; Montrul
et al., 2014; van Osch et al., 2014).
As can be seen, it is common for Spanish HSs to show gender assignment patterns different from that of Spanish monolinguals. This is exemplified by gender
agreement accuracy, especially with non-canonical nouns and feminine nouns. As
will be seen in the following section, the masculine default is also one of the strategies described in previous research in CS. Thus, in our paper we compare the use
of the masculine default in HSs both in monolingual language mode and in bilingual language mode with the same nouns elicited in both.

2.2 Code-switching and Gender Assignment of Mixed DPs
In the discussion of CS in the literature, much attention has been given to individual factors, such as proficiency in both languages, and societal factors, such as
the community of speech (Bullock & Toribio, 2009). Within this latter aspect, an
important aspect of CS is that it is molded by community norms (Torres Cacoullos
& Travis, 2015). Valdes-Kroff (2016, p. 284) asserts that "bilingual codeswitchers are
driven to follow community-driven production patterns." Aaron (2014, p. 18) also
acknowledges the importance of the conventions of the local community.
In Spanish-English CS, a "mixed DP", or a switch of languages between a
determiner and a noun in a DP has been attested (Pfaff, 1979; Poplack, 1980).
Since Spanish has both feminine and masculine grammatical gender, there are
three possible combinations for mixed DPs that consist of the following: English
determiner + Spanish noun (e.g., the casa), masculine Spanish determiner + English noun (e.g., el house), and feminine Spanish determiner + English noun (e.g.,
la house). Two strategies identified in the previous literature of relevance to this
paper are the masculine default and analogical criterion. With the masculine
default, the masculine determiner is used regardless of the gender of the Spanish
equivalent of the English noun (e.g., el house). In contrast, when implementing
the analogical strategy, the determiner that matches the Spanish equivalent is used

851

852

Nofiya Denbaum and Ana de Prada Perez

(e.g., la house). Both strategies predict the use of the masculine determiner with
masculine Spanish equivalents (el book).
Several previous studies examining gender assignment in CS and another language lacking grammatical gender have found evidence of the masculine default
strategy (Aaron, 2014; Chaston, 1996; Clegg & Waltermire, 2009; Montes-Alcala
& Shin, 2011; Otheguy & Lapidus, 2003). All these studies have investigated bilinguals living in bilingual communities in the US that have contact between the two
languages. Thus, these Spanish bilingual speakers had experience communicating
with other bilinguals and, thus, presumedly with CS. All these studies report on
data from corpus of spontaneous speech (Aaron, 2014; Valdes-Kroff, 2016) or from
sociolinguistic interviews (Clegg & Waltermire, 2009; Montes-Alcala & Shin, 2011;
Otheguy & Lapidus, 2003) and find evidence of the use of a masculine default for
English noun switches. Aaron's (2014) results, for instance, showed a strong preference for masculine gender in CS: 42% of English-origin nouns were assigned masculine gender while only 7% were feminine (the remaining 51% was unmarked for
gender), in contrast with Spanish monolingual mode where only 28% of Spanish
nouns were assigned masculine gender. Importantly, 40 out of the 42 codeswitched
DPs were assigned masculine gender. Valdes Kroff 's (2016) results also robustly
support the masculine default. Of all the mixed DPs in the corpus, 93.7% were masculine. Clegg and Waltermire (2009) reported that 94% (n = 165) of the nouns with
no biological gender were used with a masculine marker. Montes-Alcala and Shin's
(2011) results showed that speakers either assigned masculine gender (49.3%) or
no gender (bare nouns) (45.7%) with feminine gender only occurring 4.8% of
the time. Lastly, Otheguy and Lapidus (2003) reported that 87% of English-origin
nouns were produced with a masculine determiner.
In contrast to the above studies that examined speakers that were members
of a bilingual community and, thus, had experience with CS, Liceras et al. (2008)
examined native Spanish speakers in Spain who were learning English in an institutional setting. These speakers grew up in a monolingual community, and thus,
it is important to note the different language experience background. Not surprisingly, their results were different from those of the studies mentioned above
examining bilinguals living in bilingual communities. Liceras et al. (2008) elicited
data using a CS test in which participants rated mixed DPs on how good they
sounded using a 5-point Likert scale. Results showed that participants significantly
preferred matching DPs (i.e., the analogical criterion). The different results from
Liceras et al. (2008) versus findings from studies of bilinguals in a language contact
situation support the idea that bilingual language experience is an important variable in terms of gender assignment strategies in CS. Few studies have examined
this variable. One study that does address this variable is Beatty-Martinez and
Dussias (2017), who examined two groups: non-CSers and CSers. Their results

Gender assignment in Spanish-English code-switching

showed a preference for masculine determiners in mixed DPs in English-Spanish
CS, and importantly, they also found a main effect for group in that CSers were
more likely to CS than non-CSers. The present study aims to further examine
this variable of bilingual language experience and its effect on gender assignment
strategies to English nouns by including participants of varying levels of bilingual
language experience: regular CSers, infrequent CSers, and non-CSers.
Lastly, the different strategies used (analogical criterion vs. masculine default)
have also been used to establish the integration of an English-origin noun as a
borrowing or an instance of CS, as in the Nonce Borrowing Hypothesis (Sankoff,
Poplack & Vanniarajan, 1990). Sankoff et al. (1990) propose that to determine
whether a single other language word is an established loanword or a nonce
borrowing, measures of adaptation from conditioning factors should be used
rather than measures of frequency or diffusion. They examined case assignment
of English-origin nouns in Tamil-English bilinguals. In an extension of this practice to Spanish, Aaron (2014) and Clegg and Waltermire (2009) claimed that those
nouns which show feminine marking are closer to the borrowing side of the continuum while those exhibiting the masculine default are closer to the CS side. To
put together all these pieces, our project examines gender assignment comparing
the same nouns in two language modes by Spanish-English bilinguals, taking into
account conditioning factors, such as gender of the determiner and noun canonicity, as well as external factors, such as CSer type.

3.

The present paper

3.1 Research questions and hypotheses
The present study is guided by the following research questions:
1.

Is there a language mode or CS effect? How does individual participants' gender assignment compare in a Spanish session to a CS session?

Previous research has largely reported the use of a masculine default in SpanishEnglish CS (e.g., Aaron, 2014; Beatty-Martinez & Dussias, 2017; Valdes Kroff,
2016). Given the evidence for the use of a masculine default determiner with English single noun switches in previous research, we anticipate that participants will
assign gender differently to Spanish nouns in the Spanish-only session than to
English nouns in the Spanish-English CS session, such that they will show more
consistent agreement with feminine nouns in the Spanish-only session, while they
will use the masculine determiner with English nouns whose equivalents are feminine in Spanish in the CS session. Crucially, we elicited the same nouns in the

853

854

Nofiya Denbaum and Ana de Prada Perez

Spanish-only and the CS session to be able to tease apart whether the use of the
masculine default in CS is tied to lack of knowledge of the gender of the Spanish
equivalent or a separate CS strategy. We anticipate that Spanish HSs in our study
will use the masculine default in CS with nouns with which they used a feminine
determiner in the Spanish-only condition.
2. What is the effect of noun canonicity on gender assignment of monolingual
Spanish nouns and English nouns in Spanish-English CS?
In previous research, Spanish HSs have been more consistent in their gender
assignment patterns with canonical nouns. Thus, we anticipate replicating this
result in our data. With respect to gender assignment to English nouns in the CS
condition, if Spanish HSs are CS and using an English noun, which lacks grammatical gender, participants are expected to use the default determiner (masculine), irrespective of noun canonicity.
3. Is there an effect of experience with CS? Does type of CSer influence gender
assignment?
Beatty Martinez and Dussias (2017) found that experience with CS affects processing of CS forms. Thus, we anticipate differences in terms of gender assignment
to English nouns in Spanish-English CS according to CSer type. Since the use of
a masculine default seems to be the norm in CS communities, regular CSers are
expected to use a masculine default strategy more consistently. In contrast, nonCSers may approach the task differently and interpret the English noun as a borrowing, in which case, agreement with the Spanish equivalent may be used more,
as proposed in the Nonce Borrowing Hypothesis (Sankoff et al., 1990) and supported in previous research (e.g., Aaron, 2014; Clegg & Waltermire, 2009). Since
infrequent CSers are exposed to CS community norms, it is possible that they
pattern similarly to regular CSers, using the masculine default strategy, but it is
expected that this would happen to a lesser extent.

3.2 Participants
A total of thirty-two Spanish HSs completed the study (25 = female). They were all
students at a large university in the US. The participants were between the ages of
18-26 (average age = 20). A total of 18 were born in the US while 14 were born outside the continental US in the following countries/territories: Argentina (N = 1),
Cuba (N = 2), Chile (N = 1), Colombia (N = 2), Guatemala (N = 1), Nicaragua
(N = 1), Peru (N = 3), and Puerto Rico (N = 2). Of the participants who were not
born in the continental US, they arrived in the US at the following ages: 2-5
years (N = 3), 6-10 years (N = 7), and 11-17 years (N = 2). Participants were grouped

Gender assignment in Spanish-English code-switching

according to their proficiency level, as determined by an independent measure
of proficiency: 16 advanced (M = 43.13, SD = 2.6), 14 intermediate (M = 35.64,
SD = 2.69), and 2 low (M = 26, SD = 0). Of relevance to this study is their CS experience. In the language background questionnaire, participants read a definition
supported with examples of what CS is and what it is not. Then, they were asked
to report on their CS frequency. Twenty-one of the participants reported regularly using CS, whereas seven responded that they occasionally code-switch.
Lastly, four participants posited that they never engage in CS.2 All participants
had spoken Spanish since birth with their families. Most had explicit instruction
of Spanish grammar at some point in their lives, ranging from beginning during pre-school/kindergarten to high school. Their exposure to Spanish outside
of school varied greatly from just one hour per week to all the time. All participants reported using Spanish to talk to their families, and some of them mentioned using it with friends or at church. A tendency in their exposure was that
they spoke much more Spanish when living with their families, but this usage
dropped by a great extent when they came to college.

3.3 Materials and procedure
Participants completed a language background questionnaire, a Spanish proficiency test, and three gender assignment tasks based on the reading of a story.
Participants were tested on two separate occasions, which were at least three days
apart. The first encounter was entirely completed in Spanish, whereas the second
meeting was a CS session. Greetings, instructions, and materials were all carried
out and presented in Spanish in the first session and in CS in the second session.
For each session, participants read the story, and then completed three gender
assignment tasks in the following order: a fill-in-the-blank oral production task, a
story retelling task, and a gender selection test (GST).

Language background questionnaire
The language background questionnaire elicited the following information: age,
gender, birth place, years spent in Spanish-speaking and English-speaking
2. Participants' self-reported CS use was compared to the number of mixed DPs produced in
the story retelling task. The following averages of the number of mixed DPs produced during
the story retelling in the CS session were calculated: Regular CSers (M = 1.4, SD = 1.5), Infrequent CSers (M = 1.3, SD = 1.9), Non-CSers (M = 0, SD = 0). In addition, mixing proportion was
also calculated by dividing the number of mixed DPs by the total number of DPs (mixed and
unmixed) for each participant. The means and standard deviation for each group of CSers is as
follows: Regular CSers (M = .23, SD = .23), Infrequent CSers (M = .22, SD = .32), and Non-CSers
(M = 0, SD = 0).

855

856

Nofiya Denbaum and Ana de Prada Perez

countries, exposure to Spanish, language(s) considered to be first-languages,
language(s) considered to be native languages, education, Spanish and English
language use, languages spoken to each family member, and CS usage.

Spanish proficiency test
The Spanish proficiency test was taken from a multiple-choice grammar section
and a cloze test, based on the Diploma de Espanol como Lengua Extranjera
(DELE) and widely used in the fields of second language and heritage bilingualism (Montrul & Slabakova, 2003). The test has a total of 50 questions: 30
multiple-choice fill-in-the-blank questions that test vocabulary and 20 multiplechoice questions as part of a cloze text. We followed the usual grouping in the
field: advanced for those who scored 40-50 points, intermediate for those who
scored 30-39 points and low proficiency for those who scored below 30 points.3

Elicited oral production task
The story was split up into three sections in a PowerPoint presentation which contained words and images to guide readers. After each section, participants were
shown a series of sentences with fill-in-the-blanks based on the story they had
just read. All fill-in-the-blanks were determiner phrases and participants were
instructed to make sure that they used an article. See example below.
En la fiesta el perrito vio ____ ________ que le hizo recordar a su dueno.
At the party, el perrito vio ____ __________ que le hizo recordar a su owner.

Figure 2. Examples of oral production tasks in Spanish session (top) and CS session
(below)

The fill-in-the-blanks were the same for each session with the language (Spanish
or CS) being the only difference. The oral production task elicited 35 words (see
Table 3), of which 17 were masculine and 18 were feminine. Words were also
manipulated for ending type. Following Harris (1991) and Montrul et al. (2008),
we use the categories of canonical and non-canonical for our study. Harris (1991,
p. 32) explains that the canonical endings -o and -a are the most prototypical or

3. We recognize that the DELE is not the most ideal proficiency test due to its prescriptive
nature and it is not necessarily appropriate for HSs but it is widely used in the field. Additionally, an advantage to using the DELE is that it allows us to compare to other studies. Future
studies could look into other ways to measure language proficiency with heritage speakers that
may include oral language instead of written.

Gender assignment in Spanish-English code-switching

the "inner core" whereas non-canonical endings are the "outer core."4 These target words were included in the text of the story. In the CS session, they always
appeared in English in the story without any gender marking. Since Torres
Cacoullos and Ferreira (2000) found that HSs produce words differently depending on lexical frequency, frequency of each word from el Corpus de espanol: web/
dialects is presented in parentheses.
Table 3. Nouns elicited in oral production task and gender selection test
Masculine (17)

Feminine (18)

Canonical

Non-canonical

Canonical

Non-canonical

-o (6)

consonant (6)

-e (5)

-a (6)

-d (6)

-cion (6)

carro
(59,097)
queso
(34,069)
miedo
(288,616)
teatro
(130,727)
espejo
(53,795)
trabajo
(1,418,043)

mantel
(2,709)
jardin
(50,381)
avion
(71,467)
reloj
(42,850)
ascensor
(8,538)
mes
(381,671)

cafe
(115,502)
maquillaje
(33,507)
coraje
(26,810)
hombre

casa
(966,499)
mesa
(162,955)
zanahoria
(7,935)
vida
(2,466,248)
toalla
(11,032)
piscina
(23,610)

ciudad
(800,802)
universidad
(474,974)
dificultad
(68,083)
libertad
(431,891)
actitud
(168,957)
gratitud
(17,281)

educacion
(567,097)
transicion
(50,490)
renovacion
(40,903)
condicion
(167,282)
hibernacion
(1,340)
improvisacion
(7,979)

estante
(2,423)
pie
(153,093)

As exemplified in Table 3, six of the feminine words had canonical endings, and
twelve were non-canonical, of which six ended in -d and six ended in -cion. Furthermore, six of the masculine words had a canonical ending, six ended in a consonant, and five ended in -e. All words were intended to be inanimate in order to
avoid biological gender. Originally there were six of the masculine words ending
in -e, but one of them, "hombre," was animate and thus was excluded. It is important to note that in the story, none of these words appeared with any part of speech
that indicated their gender. Thus, no articles appeared before them nor did they
appear with adjectives. Additionally, these Spanish nouns do not have obvious
synonyms with another gender. Paired-samples t-tests were performed comparing the frequency of canonical and non-canonical nouns both for masculine and
feminine nouns, revealing no differences (masculine: t (2) = .213, p > .05; feminine:
t (4) = .412, p > .05). Additionally, paired-samples t-tests were also performed to
test whether the frequency of the masculine nouns was comparable to that of fem4. We recognize that there is a strong association with cue validity and canonicity. For practical
reasons, we use the term canonicity for our study.

857

858

Nofiya Denbaum and Ana de Prada Perez

inine nouns, both with canonical and noncanonical nouns, also revealing no significant differences (canonical nouns: t (2) = -1,133, p > .05; non-canonical nouns:
t (3) = -.971, p > .05).
Participants were asked to read the sentences (see Figure 2 for examples)
aloud and orally fill in the blanks with a determiner in the first blank and a noun
in the second blank. For the CS session, participants followed the same procedure
except they were told to use Spanish for the determiner and English for the noun.
All Spanish words were in yellow font (shown in bold and italics in Figure 2) and
all English words were in white font. Thus, the blank for the determiner was yellow and the blank for the noun was white in order to help participants remember
which language to use for each blank. The words immediately before the fill-inthe-blanks were always in Spanish. Thus, all the elicited code-switches were from
Spanish to English. Participants read each sentence completely before responding, and they could take as much time as they needed to answer.5

Story retelling
Participants were asked to tell the story in their own words. They were given time
to reread a version of the complete story before starting the retelling, upon which,
they were not permitted to see the story anymore. During the CS session, participants were asked to retell the story using a mix of Spanish and English but were
not instructed in anyway how to mix the two languages.

Gender selection test (GST)
The GST consisted of a list of the same words elicited in the Oral Production
Task. Each word was shown following the determiners el and la and participants
were asked to read each word orally including the determiner that sounded best
to them. In the CS session, the determiners were in Spanish, but all the nouns that
were elicited were in English (see Table 4 for examples).
Table 4. Examples of GSTs in both sessions
Spanish GST

CS GST

(el) (la) jardin
(el) (la) reloj
(el) (la) educacion
(el) (la) hibernacion
(el) (la) mantel

(el) (la) mirror
(el) (la) month
(el) (la) condition
(el) (la) attitude
(el) (la) towel

5. We recognize that the design of this task is more like cued language switching instead of
code-switching per se, However, this results from our manipulation of task naturalness.

Gender assignment in Spanish-English code-switching

3.4 Coding
The coding scheme used is exemplified for these two examples:6
(1) la
maquillaje
The-fem make-up-masc
Elicited Oral Production/Spanish session/Non-canonical/Non-CSer
`The make-up'
(2) el
party
the-masc party
`The party'

Story retelling/CS session /Canonical/Regular CSer

Gender of the determiner used: This was the dependent variable. The data was
coded across tasks and sessions for the gender of the determiner used as masculine or feminine. Example (1) was coded as feminine and (2) as masculine.
Gender of the noun/equivalent: The data were coded for the gender of the noun
in the Spanish session and the gender of the Spanish equivalent in the CS task. (1)
was coded as masculine and (2) was coded as feminine. The most obvious or most
frequent Spanish equivalent was used in order to determine the gender of the
Spanish equivalent. If there were synonyms that were had similar frequencies of
use, then that token was excluded. Only feminine nouns were examined in this
paper, given that masculine nouns in Spanish-English CS do not offer much evidence. If participants used a masculine determiner, it is impossible to identify if it
is the target masculine determiner or the masculine default.
Canonicity of the ending: This fixed effect was coded for the type of ending of the
noun in the Spanish session or the Spanish equivalent of the noun in the CS task.
(1) was coded as non-canonical and (2) as canonical, since the Spanish equivalent
fiesta `party' displays the canonical ending for feminine nouns in Spanish.
Task: Participants completed three tasks: an elicited oral production task, a story
retelling, and a gender selection test. The data from the gender selection test was
used to examine participants' knowledge of gender and was excluded from the
statistical analyses. Thus, the data was coded for task with two levels: oral production task and story retelling. Therefore, (1) was coded as oral production task and
(2) as story retelling.
Session: This fixed effect had two levels: Spanish-only session and CS session. (1)
was coded as Spanish-only session and (2) as CS session.

6. Contrasts were coding using treatment coding.

859

860

Nofiya Denbaum and Ana de Prada Perez

CSer type: Participants were divided into three groups according to their
reported use of CS into regular CSer, infrequent CSer, and non-CSer.

4.

Results

4.1 Gender asymmetry
In order to examine gender assignment in CS, the distribution of determiner utilized in mixed DPs with English nouns and Spanish determiners in the CS session
for both tasks is presented in Table 5 below. Nouns are divided according to the
gender of the Spanish equivalent.
Table 5. Gender of determiner used in mixed DPs with Spanish determiner and English
noun in CS session
English nouns with masculine
Spanish equivalent

English nouns with feminine
Spanish equivalent

Oral production

Retelling

Oral production

Retelling

N (%)

N (%)

N (%)

N (%)

63 (96.9%)

123 (22.2%)

28 (53.8%)

2 (3.1%)

430 (77.8%)

24 (46.2%)

553

52

Masculine determiner 520 (93.5%)
Feminine determiner
Total

36 (6.5%)
556

65

From Table 5 above, a clear gender asymmetry can be observed in that the feminine determiner is barely used with nouns with a masculine Spanish equivalent
whereas the masculine determiner is used much more frequently with nouns
with a feminine Spanish equivalent. This finding exemplifies that speakers tend
to assign masculine gender more than feminine gender when not following the
analogical criterion. Since this paper examines the use of a masculine default,
only feminine nouns were included in the analysis. Table 6 presents the data
on the gender of the determiner used with feminine Spanish nouns or English
nouns whose Spanish equivalent is feminine across ending types (C = canonical,
NC = non-canonical), tasks, and sessions. In the CS session, only English nouns
(mixed DPs) are included, not Spanish nouns.
Participants largely used Spanish feminine determiners with feminine nouns
in the Spanish-only session, with a higher rate of masculine nouns with noncanonical endings in oral production. In contrast, in the CS mode, the rate of use of
the feminine determiner is lower, particularly in the retelling session where the use
of the masculine determiner is slightly higher than that of the feminine determiner.

Gender assignment in Spanish-English code-switching

Table 6. Gender of the determiner used with feminine nouns or feminine Spanish
equivalent nouns across noun endings, tasks, and sessions
Session

Spanish-only

CS

Task

Oral production

Retelling

Noun
canonicity

C

NC

C

N (%)

N (%)

Masculine
determiner

83
(5.8%)

Feminine
determiner
Total

Oral production

Retelling

NC

C

NC

C

NC

N (%)

N (%)

N (%)

N (%)

N (%)

N (%)

71
(19.2%)

2
(1.0%)

7
(8.9%)

37
(19.4%)

109
(28.7%)

19
(52.8%)

9
(52.9%)

108
(94.2%)

299
(80.8%)

202
72
(99.0%) (91.1%)

154
(80.6%)

271
(71.3%)

17
(47.2%)

8
(47.1%)

191

370

204

191

380

36

17

79

4.2 Language mode, codeswitcher type, and noun canonicity
In order to examine the effect of language session, CSer type, task, and noun ending canonicity of the Spanish equivalent, a mixed effects multivariate regression
was carried out. This analysis examined gender assignment of all nouns that had
feminine gender (in the case of Spanish nouns) or that had a feminine Spanish
equivalent (in the case of English nouns). The dependent variable was the gender
of the determiner produced (application value: masculine). Session, CSer type,
task, and noun ending canonicity of the Spanish equivalent were fixed effects
while participant and item were treated as a random effect. Two significant interactions were observed and are reported in Table 7 below.
Table 7. Mixed effects analysis of all the feminine nouns included in the analysis.
Application value: Masculine determiner
Input

.00

AIC

866.794

Total

14
Factor weight

%

N

Canonical & CS

.67

21.6%

218

Non-can & Spanish

.67

14.3%

448

Canonical & Spanish

.33

1.0%

395

Non-can & CS

.33

26.9%

387

Noun canonicity * Session

Task * Session

p < .001

p = .001

861

862

Nofiya Denbaum and Ana de Prada Perez

Table 7. (continued)
Production & Spanish

.64

10.5%

Retelling & CS

.64

53.8%

52

Production & CS

.36

22.2%

553

.36

3.2%

282

Retelling & Spanish
Participant
Item

561

Random
Random

The most significant interaction was between noun canonicity and session. Participants used significantly more masculine determiners with canonical nouns in
CS than with canonical nouns in Spanish. They also used more masculine determiners with non-canonical nouns in Spanish than with non-canonical nouns in
CS. Additionally, there was an interaction between task and session. Participants
used more masculine determiners in the elicited oral production task than in the
story retelling in the Spanish-only session. In contrast, in the CS session, participants used more masculine determiners in the story retelling than in the elicited
oral production task.
Since session had interactions with noun canonicity and task, it is warranted
to further investigate the effect of the other variables in each session separately:
monolingual Spanish and CS. This is important to reach conclusions about a variable such as noun ending canonicity in each language mode. Therefore, two separate analyses were carried out: one with data from just the monolingual Spanish
session and another with only the CS session data. The three independent variables included in the analyses were CSer type, noun ending, and task. Participant
and item were included as random effects. Interaction terms were also included,
and no interaction was found to be significant. Table 8 below presents the data
from the Spanish only session.
From Table 8, it can be observed that noun canonicity was the only significant
predictor of gender assignment in the monolingual Spanish session. A noncanonical noun favored the masculine determiner whereas a canonical noun
favored the feminine determiner.7 CSer type was not a significant predictor of gender assignment in the Spanish session, which indicates that all participants had
similar accuracy of gender assignment in Spanish. Likewise, task was not significant for the Spanish session. Next, the analysis from the CS session is presented
below in Table 9. Similar to the previous analysis for the Spanish-only data, interaction terms were also included, and no interaction was found to be significant.
7. Both non-canonical ending types -cion and -d had similar patterns in that they both
strongly favored the masculine determiner (factor weights of .85 and .70 respectively).

Gender assignment in Spanish-English code-switching

Table 8. Mixed effects analysis of gender assignment of all feminine nouns in the
monolingual Spanish session. Application value: Masculine determiner
Input

.003

AIC

296.266

Total

843
Factor weight

%

N

Non-canonical

.87

14.3%

448

Canonical (-a)

.13

10.0%

395

Noun canonicity

p < .001

Range

74

Participant

Random

Item

Random

Table 9. Mixed effects analysis of gender assignment of all English nouns with Spanish
feminine equivalents in the CS session. Application value: Masculine determiner
Input

.167

AIC

579.18

Total

605
Factor weight

%

Retelling

.70

53.8%

52

Oral elicited production

.30

22.2%

553

Task

p < .001

Range
CSer Type

N

40
p = .008

Regular CSer

.76

29.5%

396

Infrequent CSer

.65

23.1%

134

Non-CSer

.15

4.0%

75

Range

61

Participant

Random

Item

Random

As can be seen in Table 9 above, in the CS session, task and CSer type were significant predictors of gender assignment. The story retelling favored the masculine determiner with an English noun whose Spanish equivalent is feminine while
the oral elicited production task favored the feminine determiner. This can be
explained by the fact that the retelling task consisted of more natural, spontaneous speech. Thus, it enabled our participants to practice CS norms that they

863

864

Nofiya Denbaum and Ana de Prada Perez

would take part in during everyday interactions. In terms of CSer type, regular
CSers favored the production of a masculine determiner with an English noun
whose Spanish equivalent is feminine the most, followed by infrequent CSers who
showed the same tendency but to a lesser degree. In contrast, non-CSers favored
the feminine determiner with a feminine Spanish equivalent.
To examine CS effects, independently of specific lexical items, Table 10 below
presents gender mismatches of mixed DPs in CS that are unique to CS versus
those that are repeats from the Spanish session. In order to calculate gender mismatches unique to CS, all gender mismatches in mixed DPs including a Spanish
determiner were identified in the CS session. Then, all nouns from the CS session that were not mentioned by the same participant in the Spanish session were
eliminated from the analysis. This left us with pairs of nouns that each individual produced: one from the Spanish session and one in English in the CS session
(e.g., el libertad and el freedom; la zanahoria and el carrot). A gender mismatch
was deemed unique to CS if the participant had assigned the correct gender in the
Spanish session but then had a gender mismatch of the same word in CS (e.g., la
zanahoria and el carrot). The cases that were not unique to CS (e.g., el libertad
and el freedom) were eliminated.
Table 10. Distribution of mixed DPs with gender mismatches to the Spanish equivalent
unique to CS
Unique to CS

Not unique to CS (repeat of gender mismatch from
Spanish session)

N

%

N

%

Oral elicited
production

99/
145

68%

46/145

32%

Gender selection
task

196/
225

87%

29/225

13%

Story retelling

21/21

100%

0/21

0%

Table 10 above shows that out of the gender mismatches in mixed DPs in CS (that
have comparable tokens in the Spanish session), the majority are unique to CS,
meaning that participants know the correct gender in Spanish but behave differently in CS by using the masculine determiner with nouns whose Spanish equivalent is feminine. Thus, participants display distinct behaviors in monolingual
Spanish and CS and thus exhibit a CS effect.

Gender assignment in Spanish-English code-switching

5.

Discussion

The first research question sought to examine whether HSs of Spanish behave differently in terms of gender assignment to Spanish nouns in a monolingual Spanish
session compared to gender assignment of English nouns in a CS session. While
earlier research has documented the use of different strategies in CS, previous work
generally did not compare the same speaker in different language modes. This
comparison can further clarify whether Spanish HSs in our study use a different
strategy when they are CS than when they are in monolingual mode. For instance,
the masculine default strategy (e.g., Montes-Alcala & Shin, 2011; Valdes Kroff, 2016)
could be partly due to the speaker's lack of knowledge of the gender of a noun or
their variable gender assignment, which has been amply documented in research
on the Spanish of HSs (Montrul et al., 2008). Our results showed that participants
used a masculine determiner with a feminine noun or a feminine Spanish equivalent significantly more in the CS session than in the Spanish session. Crucially,
since we had data from the same participants in a Spanish monolingual session and
a CS session, we were able to compare the same nouns produced in Spanish and
CS by each individual. Findings showed that participants exhibited a CS effect in
that they used the gender-matching determiner with a noun in Spanish but when
they produced the same feminine noun in English in the CS session, they behaved
differently, using the masculine determiner. Although this is the first study to compare participants' gender assignment of nouns in both a Spanish and a CS session,
results that there is a more frequent use of the masculine determiner with feminine
nouns in the CS session is in line with predictions about CS behavior from previous research. Several studies have observed a tendency or preference for masculine gender assignment in Spanish-English CS (e.g., Aaron, 2014; Montes-Alcala
& Shin, 2011; Otheguy & Lapidus, 2003; Valdes Kroff, 2016). This result can be
explained from a grammatical approach to CS, given the fact that English nouns do
not have gender and, as a result, there is no gender to check with the determiner.
It is well established in the literature, that the masculine determiner is the default
in monolingual Spanish (Hualde, Olarrea, & Escobar, 2003). When Spanish HSs
are CS, then, they are applying the default determiner for a noun that lacks grammatical gender. Thus, the current study contributes to the field by showing that this
gender assignment behavior is not just the result of HSs not knowing the correct
gender assignment in Spanish but an extension of the use of the masculine default
to English nouns, as these do not have grammatical gender either.
The second research question examined the effect of noun canonicity in Spanish in the Spanish-only session and in the Spanish equivalent to English nouns in
CS. Previous studies have observed that Spanish speakers use grammatical gender
cues to assign gender including the final phoneme -o/-a, the penultimate rhyme,

865

866

Nofiya Denbaum and Ana de Prada Perez

and final syllable (Eddington, 2002). Importantly, these cues are not present in
English nouns. Thus, if our speakers used these cues with English nouns in the CS
session, it would imply they were accessing the Spanish equivalent. In addition,
several studies have reported that HSs are less accurate with gender agreement
with non-canonical nouns in monolingual Spanish (e.g., Montrul et al., 2008; van
Osch et al., 2014). To the best of our knowledge, no previous research has examined whether there is an effect of noun canonicity in English single-noun switches.
A noun canonicity effect, or lack thereof, can facilitate our understanding of these
single noun switches in a similar way to how the gender of the determiner can
allow us to distinguish between CS and borrowing (Aaron, 2014). It can inform as
to whether the Spanish equivalent is being accessed and the English noun being
adapted to Spanish. Results regarding the effect of noun canonicity further support the finding of a CS or bilingual mode effect. When separate logistic regression analyses were carried out for each session, it was found that noun canonicity
was the only significant factor in the Spanish monolingual mode session and that
non-canonical nouns favored the use of the masculine determiner with feminine
nouns in Spanish. However, in the CS session, noun canonicity was not a significant predictor of gender mismatches, meaning that the use of the masculine
default was similar with English nouns whose equivalents had canonical endings
and those whose equivalents had non-canonical endings. Therefore, participants
treated English nouns similarly to non-canonical nouns in Spanish, in that they
did not offer cues with respect to gender. In fact, the interaction between noun
canonicity and session showed that canonical nouns in CS favored the masculine
default while non-canonical nouns in Spanish favored it. This further supports a
CS effect, as it shows that Spanish HSs are influenced by gender and noun canonicity in Spanish but behave differently in CS. Results from the Spanish session corroborate findings from previous studies in that Spanish HSs were less accurate
with gender assignment of non-canonical nouns (Alarcon, 2011; Montrul et al.,
2008; Montrul et al., 2013; Montrul et al., 2014; van Osch et al., 2014). However,
the present study extends this literature by showing that noun-canonicity is not an
important factor for gender assignment of English nouns, which exemplifies that
HSs behave differently when code-switching.
The final research question inquired whether gender assignment is affected by
type of CSer. Although previous research examining gender assignment did not
compare different types of CSers but possibly included different types of CSers
across studies (and possibly within studies), this factor can contribute to a better
understanding of gender assignment in Spanish-English CS. It could, for instance,
explain some of the different strategies (masculine default, analogical criterion,
etc.) reported in previous studies. It is possible that the masculine default is used
in communities which regularly engage in CS (bilinguals in Miami, Valdes-Kroff,

Gender assignment in Spanish-English code-switching

2016, or bilinguals in NYC in Montes Alcala & Shin, 2011) but not by English
second language learners (e.g., Liceras et al., 2008). Additionally, Beatty-Martinez
and Dussias (2017) found differences between regular CSers and non-CSers. With
this in mind, we coded our data for three types of CSers: regular CSers, infrequent CSers, and non-CSers. It was important to see the effect of CSer type in
each of the two language sessions separately in order to examine whether one of
the types of CSers did not know the correct gender in Spanish as much as the
other groups or whether it was a behavior unique to CS. As predicted, CSer type
was not significant in the Spanish session but was in the CS session. In CS, regular
CSers and infrequent CSers favored the masculine determiner while non-CSers
favored the feminine determiner. Thus, it can be concluded that in Spanish, there
is no statistical difference between CSer types in gender assignment and that CS
behavior did not have a bearing on the accuracy of gender assignment in Spanish.
It appears that the CS effect we observe is much stronger with regular CSers. This
result is also consistent with a CS effect as CS practices have been shown to vary
according to speaker-type. Poplack (1980), for instance, reported different types
of CS between those who were Spanish-dominant, who used more emblematic
CS (what we have been referring to as borrowing here, or insertional type of CS
in Muysken, 1995), and those who were more balanced in both languages, who
engaged in intimate CS (CS, here, or the alternational type of CS in Muysken,
1995). Our results, thus, can be interpreted as indicative of the masculine default
strategy being the preferred strategy in CS, while the analogical criterion is used in
borrowing, and the preference in using one over the other depends on the type of
bilingual speaker. This is consistent with the idea that regular CSers are exposed
to the convention of community norms - a CS effect consisting of the tendency to
use a masculine determiner with nouns whose Spanish equivalents are feminine.
Aaron (2014) expresses the importance of conventions of a speech community:
"Language is a local phenomenon, molded by speakers in everyday life as they
build a grammar that works in their lives" (2014, p. 18).
Our participants come from a rather heterogeneous community as there are
Spanish speakers from a variety of origins, similar to Otheguy and Lapidus'
(2003) participants living in New York. Previous studies have found similar results
regarding a masculine default regardless of differences in speech communities in
the US (Aaron, 2014; Otheguy & Lapidus, 2003). For example, the Spanish of New
Mexico is unique in that it has had long-term contact with English for over 150
years, but Aaron (2014) observed use of the masculine default similar to Otheguy
and Lapidus (2003). Thus, we would expect similar results to those observed in
the current study in other US Spanish heritage communities as long as the participants are bilinguals in a true contact situation and regular CSers and not English
second language learners in an institutional setting.

867

868

Nofiya Denbaum and Ana de Prada Perez

These results, as a whole, are consistent with the use of a masculine default
determiner with an English noun in Spanish-English CS, as shown through three
pieces of evidence discussed in this paper: (i) overall comparison of language
modes through the two sessions, (ii) the effect of CSer type, and (iii) the effect of
noun canonicity. Overall, results indicate that participants use significantly more
masculine determiners in CS than in Spanish-only, thus, identifying a CS mode
effect. Although the participants also used feminine determiners with English
nouns, it is possible that, in those cases, they are adapting the nouns, i.e., resorting
to borrowing instead. Our results showed that those participants who rarely or
never engage in CS used the masculine default significantly less in CS, as compared
to those speakers who regularly engage in CS, even though these speaker groups
behaved similarly with respect to gender assignment in the Spanish monolingual
mode session. Lastly, Spanish HSs were sensitive to noun canonicity in Spanish.
In CS, in contrast, participants did not differ in consistency of gender agreement
depending on the noun ending of the Spanish equivalent. This indicates that when
Spanish HSs were using the English noun, they were not adapting it to the Spanish
equivalent gender. These results cannot be attributed to lack of knowledge of the
gender of the word (Spanish equivalent), since our results showed that participants used the expected feminine determiner in Spanish with the same nouns used
in the CS session where they did not use the feminine determiner consistently.

6.

Conclusion

The current study adds to previous literature on gender assignment of singlenoun switches in Spanish-English CS in that it is the first study to examine gender
assignment by the same individuals in two separate language sessions or eliciting
the same nouns in both sessions. Examining data from the same speakers from two
different language sessions allowed us to identify if gender assignment follows the
same patterns in CS as in Spanish. Particularly, we were able to compare the same
nouns in both Spanish and English, thus ruling out the idea that HSs use gender
mismatches in CS because they do not know the correct gender in monolingual
Spanish mode.
This paper additionally examined the effect on gender assignment of two
variables that had not been previously included in the literature: noun canonicity
and CSer type. While the endings of the English nouns had been examined in
previous CS work, the ending of the Spanish equivalent had not been explored
in CS. Examining the effect of CSer type was informative to examine the status
of these single-noun switches as instances of CS or of borrowing. This result also
contributes to the role of language experience in CS behavior. Our results show
that those who engage in CS use single-noun CS and treat them differently than

Gender assignment in Spanish-English code-switching

those who are not regular CSers. It is possible that the difficulty in finding a consistent result for the masculine default strategy in the previous literature can be
ascribed to the participants used, where a combination of CSer profiles might
have been used across studies. Liceras et al. (2008), for instance, likely used participants who were non-CSers while Montes-Alcala and Shin (2011) used participants who were regular or, at least, infrequent CSers. We would encourage further
research to compare these different types of CSers across different contexts to further clarify if the strategies used are related to language dominance or if they are
related to language experience regarding CS, as we would predict.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Jorge Valdes-Kroff for his guidance throughout the data collection and
feedback on earlier versions of this paper. We are also grateful to Victor Jordan for his assistance
recruiting participants and to Manuel Diaz-Campos for his help with data analysis. Thank you
to Falcon Restrepo Ramos, Isabel Deibel, and David Eddington for their help tweaking the final
analyses.

References
Aaron, J. E. (2014). Lone English-origin nouns in Spanish: The precedence of community
norms. International Journal of Bilingualism, 20(10), 1-22.
Alarcon, I. V. (2011). Spanish gender agreement under complete and incomplete acquisition:
Early and late bilinguals' linguistic behavior within the noun phrase. Bilingualism:
Language and Cognition, 14(03), 332-350. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1366728910000222
Beatty-Martinez, A. L., & Dussias, P. E. (2017). Bilingual experience shapes Language
processing: Evidence from code-switching. Journal of Memory and Language, 95, 173-189.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2017.04.002

Beatty-Martinez, A. L., & Dussias, P. E. (2019). Revisiting Masculine and Feminine
AGrammatical Gender in Spanish: Linguistic, Psycholinguistic, and Neurolinguistic
Evidence. Frontiers in Psychology, 10, 751. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2019.00751
Beatty-Martinez, A. L., Valdes Kroff, J. R., & Dussias, P. E. (2018). From the field to the lab: a
converging methods approach to the study of codeswitching. Languages, 3(2), 1-19.
https://doi.org/10.3390/languages3020019

Bull, W. E. (1965). Spanish for teachers: applied linguistics. New York: Ronald Press Co.
Bullock, B. E., & Toribio, A. J. E. (2009). The Cambridge handbook of linguistic code-switching.
Cambridge University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511576331
Chaston, J. M. (1996). Sociolinguistic analysis of gender agreement in article/noun
combinations in Mexican American Spanish in Texas. Bilingual Review/La Revista
Bilingue, 21(3), 195-202.
Clegg, J., & Waltermire, M. (2009). Gender Assignment to English-Origin Nouns in The
Spanish of the Southwestern United States. Southwest Journal of Linguistics, 28 (1), 1-18.

869

870

Nofiya Denbaum and Ana de Prada Perez

Eddington, D. (2002). Spanish gender assignment in an analogical framework. Journal of
Quantitative Linguistics, 9(1), 49-75. https://doi.org/10.1076/jqul.9.1.49.8482
Grosjean, F. (2001). The bilingual's language modes. In J. L. Nicol (Ed.), One mind, two
languages: Bilingual language processing, (pp. 1-22). Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Harris, J. W. (1991). The exponence of gender in Spanish. Linguistic Inquiry, 22(1), 27-62.
Herring, J. R., Deuchar, M., Couto, M. C. P., & Quintanilla, M. M. (2010). `I saw the madre':
evaluating predictions about codeswitched determiner-noun sequences using
Spanish-English and Welsh-English data. International Journal of Bilingual Education
and Bilingualism, 13(5), 553-573. https://doi.org/10.1080/13670050.2010.488286
Hualde, J. I., Olarrea, A. & Escobar, A. M. (2003). Introduccion a la linguistica hispanica.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Liceras, J. M., Fuertes, R. F., Perales, S., Perez-Tattam, R., & Spradlin, K. T. (2008). Gender and
gender agreement in bilingual native and non-native grammars: A view from child and
adult functional-lexical mixings. Lingua, 118(6), 827-851.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lingua.2007.05.006

Lew-Williams, C., & Fernald, A. (2007). Young children learning Spanish make rapid use of
grammatical gender in spoken word recognition. Psychological Science, 18(3), 193-198.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.14679280.2007.01871.x

Montes-Alcala, C. & Shin, N. L. (2011). Las keys versus el key: Feminine gender assignment in
mixed-language texts. Spanish in Context, 8(1), 119-143. https://doi.org/10.1075/sic.8.1.06mon
Montrul, S. A. (2012). Is the heritage language like a second language?. Eurosla Yearbook, 12(1),
1-29. https://doi.org/10.1075/eurosla.12.03mon
Montrul, S., Davidson, J., De La Fuente, I., & Foote, R. (2014). Early language experience
facilitates the processing of gender agreement in Spanish heritage speakers. Bilingualism:
Language and Cognition, 17(01), 118-138. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1366728913000114
Montrul, S., de la Fuente, I., Davidson, J., & Foote, R. (2013). The role of experience in the
acquisition and production of diminutives and gender in Spanish: Evidence from L2
learners and heritage speakers. Second Language Research, 29, 87-118.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0267658312458268

Montrul, S., Foote, R., & Perpinan, S. (2008). Gender agreement in adult second language
learners and Spanish heritage speakers: The effects of age and context of acquisition.
Language Learning, 58(3), 503-553. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.14679922.2008.00449.x
Montrul, S., & Slabakova, R. (2003). Competence similarities between native and near-native
speakers: An investigation of the preterite-imperfect contrast in Spanish. Studies in second
language acquisition, 25(3), 351-398. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263103000159
Muysken, P. (1995). Code-switching and grammatical theory. In L. Milroy & P. Muysken
(Eds.), One Speaker, Two Languages: Cross-disciplinary Perspectives on Code-switching
(pp. 177-198). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511620867.009

Otheguy, R., & Lapidus, N. (2003). An adaptive approach to noun gender in New York contact
Spanish. Amsterdam Studies in the Theory and History of Linguistic Science Series 4
(pp.209-232).
Pfaff, C. W. (1979). Constraints on language mixing: intrasentential code-switching and
borrowing in Spanish/English. Language 55(2), 291-318. https://doi.org/10.2307/412586
Poplack, S. (1980). Sometimes I'll start a sentence in Spanish y termino en espanol: toward a
typology of code-switching. Linguistics 18(7-8), 581-618.

Gender assignment in Spanish-English code-switching

Poplack, S., Pousada, A., & Sankoff, D. (1982). Competing influences on gender assignment:
Variable process, stable outcome. Lingua, 57(1), 1-28.
https://doi.org/10.1016/00243841(82)900687

Sankoff, D., Poplack, S., & Vanniarajan, S. (1990). The case of the nonce loan in Tamil.
Language Variation and Change, 2, 71-101. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0954394500000272
Smead, R. N. (2000). On the assignment of gender to Chicano anglicisms: Processes and
results. Bilingual Review/La Revista Bilingue, 25, 277-297.
Torres Cacoullos, R., & Ferreira, F. (2000). Lexical frequency and voiced labiodental-bilabial
variation in New Mexican Spanish. Southwest Journal of Linguistics, 19(2), 1-17.
Torres Cacoullos, R., & Travis, C. E. (2015). Gauging convergence on the ground: Codeswitching in the community. International Journal of Bilingualism 19(4), 365-386.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1367006913516046

Valdes Kroff, J. R. (2016). Mixed NPs in bilingual Spanish-English speech: Using a corpusbased approach to inform models of sentence processing. In R. E. Guzzardo Tamargo,
C. Mazak, & M. C. Parafita Cuoto (Eds.), Code-switching in the Spanish-speaking
Caribbean and its diaspora. Amsterdam. The Netherlands: John Benjamins.
https://doi.org/10.1075/ihll.11.12val

van Osch, B., Hulk, A., Sleeman, P., & Irizarri van Suchtelen, P. (2014). Gender agreement in
interface contexts in the oral production of heritage speakers of Spanish in the
Netherlands. Linguistics in the Netherlands, 31(1), 93-106.
https://doi.org/10.1075/avt.31.08osc

White, L., Valenzuela, E., Kozlowska-Macgregor, M., & Leung, Y. K. I. (2004). Gender and
number agreement in nonnative Spanish. Applied psycholinguistics, 25(1), 105-133.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0142716404001067

Address for correspondence
Nofiya Denbaum
Indiana University
Spanish and Portuguese
355 N Jordan Ave
Bloomington, IN 47405
USA
ndenbaum@indiana.edu

Co-author information
Ana de Prada Perez
Maynooth University
School of Modern Languages Literatures and
Cultures
Ana.DePradaPerez@mu.ie

871

872

Nofiya Denbaum and Ana de Prada Perez

Publication history
Date received: 26 April 2019
Date accepted: 1 April 2020
Published online: 25 May 2020

