The Mandarin ba-construction in
school-age heritage speakers and their
parental input
Ziyin Mai, Lucy Zhao, and Virginia Yip

City University of Hong Kong | The University of Sheffield |
Chinese University of Hong Kong

Recent research has identified language development in school-age heritage
children as an important yet missing link between child early bilinguals and
adult heritage speakers. This study investigates the Mandarin
ba-construction ([(NP1)-ba-NP2-VP]) through elicited narration among
heritage Mandarin children (n = 27, aged 4-14) and their parents (n = 18) in
the UK. The results showed considerable similarities between the children
and their parents in a number of key structural properties of the
ba-construction. However, the children produced the ba-construction with
reduced frequency and in a "heritage variety" with a reduced set of nominal
and verbal phrases in NP2 and VP, which is not attested in a group of agematched Mandarin speakers in Beijing. Additionally, higher frequency of
the ba-construction in the heritage children's production is associated with
greater lexical diversity, rather than higher frequency of the
ba-construction, in their parental input. We lay out positive aspects of the
heritage variety of the ba-construction in sustaining the heritage language in
bilingual contexts and consider the different roles of structural frequency
and lexical diversity in parental input in maintaining the heritage grammar
in late childhood and adolescence.
Keywords: Mandarin, heritage, input, syntax, lexicon

1.

Introduction

A heritage language is widely recognized as the language that early bilinguals are
exposed to at home in a society where the language is not the majority language
(Benmamoun, Montrul & Polinsky, 2013; Kupisch & Rothman, 2018; Polinsky
& Scontras, 2020). Heritage languages are very often brought into a society by
https://doi.org/10.1075/lab.18025.mai | Published online: 18 February 2021
Linguistic Approaches to Bilingualism 12:3 (2022), pp. 377-405. ISSN 1879-9264 | EISSN 1879-9272
(c) John Benjamins Publishing Company

378

Ziyin Mai, Lucy Zhao, and Virginia Yip

international migrants and passed on to the next generation through naturalistic parent-child interactions. Despite considerable efforts to preserve the heritage language by some parents, many properties of the heritage language undergo
systematic changes in the children, who almost inevitably become unbalanced
bilinguals and dominant in the societal majority language by adulthood. There is
growing evidence that within a heritage language, word order and phrasal structural properties are usually better preserved and more resilient to change than
morphological, semantic and discourse properties (see reviews in Benmamoun
et al., 2013; Polinsky & Scontras, 2020). Differences between the heritage grammar and the corresponding variety in the homeland (hereafter "homeland variety") have been attributed to a number of factors such as the heritage child
receiving a generally reduced amount of input in the heritage language (hereafter
"heritage input") compared to their peers in the homeland (Silva-Corvalan, 2003;
Flores, Santos, Jesus & Marques, 2017), differences between the input received
by the heritage children and that received by their peers in the homeland (Pires
& Rothman, 2009; Montrul & Sanchez-Walker, 2013), cross-linguistic influence
from the societal majority language (Montrul & Ionin, 2010), and loss of previously acquired properties in later stages of development (attrition) (Polinsky, 2011;
Montrul, Bhatt & Girju, 2015).
This study investigates properties of the Mandarin ba-construction in schoolage heritage children and their parents through elicited narration and examines
the impact of parental input on heritage language development. In the next section, we will discuss why heritage language development at school age is an
important link between early child bilinguals and adult heritage speakers, and
why two fine-grained aspects of parental input, namely, structural frequency and
lexical diversity, may impact on heritage language development.

2.

Parental input and heritage language development at school age

Heritage speakers, especially those that are second-generation speakers born of
immigrant parents, are early bilinguals. Existing studies on early heritage bilinguals have clustered at two ends of the acquisition process: the initial stage where
toddlers and pre-school children are beginning to develop proficiency in both the
heritage and the societal majority languages fairly rapidly, and the late stage where
young adult heritage speakers have completed the language shift and become
dominant in the majority language. There have been only a few empirical
attempts to directly examine what happens in between (Montrul & SanchezWalker, 2013; Flores et al., 2017; Jia & Paradis, 2020). Thus, developmental
changes in school-age heritage children and adolescents constitute the missing

Ba-construction in child heritage Mandarin

link between child bilingual speakers and adult heritage speakers (Montrul, 2018).
Without systematic studies on this population, it is hard to pinpoint the stage
at which differential acquisition between the heritage and homeland speakers
emerges. The current study investigates heritage grammar in this population with
an aim to contribute to a full understanding of heritage bilingualism across the
life span.
Language input has been shown to impact child language development, but
the nature and magnitude of the impact varies across fine-grained aspects of
the input, linguistic domains and developmental stages (Paradis & Gruter, 2014;
Ambridge, Kidd, Rowland & Theakston, 2015; Rowe & Snow, 2020). In studies on
language attrition in child and teenage bilingual returnees whose input in one of
their languages drops abruptly due to change of residence, the amount of input
in the language with reduced input has been found to play a more important role
in sustaining syntax-discourse properties than in sustaining narrow-syntax phenomena in that language (Flores, 2012).
The association between the input and the development of the heritage language in school-age heritage speakers is particularly interesting. In terms of input
composition, this is a "transition stage" in which the relative proportion of the
heritage language and the majority language changes drastically due to the child
entering mainstream schooling, with that of the heritage input further reduced,
and that of the majority language input significantly increased. The factor of input
has recently been considered in predicting and accounting for variations in grammatical development in the heritage language among school-age children and
adolescents (e.g., Jia & Paradis, 2015; Flores et al., 2017). Nevertheless, the input
has only been measured at a macro-level (e.g., whether only one or both parents address the child in the heritage language) based on reported data, and little
has been done to directly observe and analyse fine-grained aspects of the heritage
input available to school-age bilinguals based on transcript data, which is a paradigm widely adopted in studies with younger bilingual children (e.g., Paradis &
Navarro, 2003; De Houwer, 2014).
Structural frequency and lexical diversity are two of the most widely studied
fine-grained aspects of language input. Structural frequency in the input (namely,
frequency of a given grammatical structure in a given amount of input) is known
to mould the development of complex grammatical structures such as
wh-questions and passive constructions at early developmental stages in monolingual children, with higher structural frequency in the input associated with earlier acquisition of these structures (Rowland, Pine, Lieven, & Theakston, 2003;
Ambridge et al, 2015). However, it is less clear whether higher structural frequency
plays a similarly facilitative role at later stages of grammatical development in
school-age children, whether monolingual or bilingual.

379

380

Ziyin Mai, Lucy Zhao, and Virginia Yip

Lexical diversity in the input, usually measured by the number of unique
words (also known as "word type", including both functional and lexical words)
provided within a given amount of input, has been found to positively correlate
with the lexical diversity or vocabulary size of young children, especially toddlers
(Huttenlocher, Waterfall, Vasilyeva, Vevea, & Hedges, 2010; Rowe, 2012).
Nonetheless, there is little existing literature on direct associations between lexical
diversity in the input and grammatical development in the children.
In sum, there is a lack of understanding of the relation between grammatical
development in the heritage language and fine-grained aspects of the heritage
input at this important transition stage. At this stage, will higher frequency of a
grammatical structure and greater lexical diversity in the potentially very limited
and restricted heritage input lead to further development of the grammatical
structure in the child's heritage language? To address this issue, we elicited narratives from school-age heritage children and their parents from Mandarinspeaking families in the UK and examined, in the narratives, properties of the
ba-construction, a complex yet prominent grammatical structure in Mandarin
Chinese, as well as how structural frequency and lexical diversity in the parental
input correlate with the children's production. Below we will first introduce the
syntactic and semantic nuances of the ba-construction, and then present details
of our own study.

3.

The ba-construction and its acquisition

3.1 Grammatical structure and semantic properties
Mandarin is similar to English in having a canonical word order of subject-verbobject (SVO). Unlike English, which strictly disallows SOV order, Mandarin has
a ba-construction, which has an apparent SOV order and is preferred by native
speakers over the canonical SVO order in a wide range of disposal and causative
contexts across colloquial and formal styles (Tsao, 1987). Linearly, the construction appears in the order of [(NP1)-ba-NP2-VP], as in (1), with NP1 as the agent
or causer of the event denoted by the VP, and NP2 the patient or affectee (but
see Li, 2017 for other possibilities). NP1 is the subject/topic and can be overt or
null based on syntactic, semantic and discourse conditions independent of this
construction. NP2, on the other hand, must be pronounced and overt.

Ba-construction in child heritage Mandarin

(1) Ba-construction
[(NP1) [ba [NP2
[VP]]]]
[Ta
[ba [ vP qingwa [ v' [guan *(zai pingzi li).]]]]]
3sg
ba frog
shut
at bottle inside
`He trapped the frog in the bottle.'

Syntactically, the marker ba can be analysed as a functional head subcategorizing
a verbal projection as its complement, for instance, a light verb phrase (vP), with
NP1 located in the Spec position of the ba-phrase and NP2 in Spec vP, illustrated
in (1) (structure based on Huang, Li & Li, 2009, p. 182). Beyond syntax, there are
various semantic and pragmatic factors that affect the well-formedness and felicity of the ba-construction in context (see Li, 2017; Cui & Zhao, forthcoming for
a comprehensive review). A widely cited "boundedness condition" states that the
ba-construction only allows events that are temporally bounded to enter the construction. Those events are either telic with inherent endings or presented with
external temporal boundaries (Liu, 1997). The sentence in (1), for example, would
be unacceptable without the result-encoding locational complement zai pingzi li
`in the bottle'.
Although the ba-construction is one of the most extensively studied structures
in Chinese, theoretical analyses differ as to the exact nature of ba's complement
and the syntactic movements deriving NP2. The thematic, aspectual and information structure constraints on the structure are also under debate. There is, however, a consensus that the post-NP2 position does not accept bare simple verbs
and that the verbal complement selected by ba can be structurally very complex
(Paul, 2015, p. 25-48; Li, 2017). Table 1 summarizes typical nominal and verbal
phrases in the NP2 and VP positions in core cases of the ba-construction. 1

3.2 Acquisition of ba-construction across contexts
Deng, Mai & Yip (2018) found that in monolingual children, the ba-construction
emerges around 2;0 and becomes highly productive by 2;6. Despite its apparent
non-canonical word order, it is not rare in child-directed speech, appearing in
0.77% to 4.37% of the adult utterances directed to children younger than 3;05.
For children aged 2;2-2;3, 60-70% of the VPs in their utterances with the
ba-construction (hereafter "ba-utterances") are resultative verb compounds
(RVCs).
1. For other candidates of the NPs and VPs (e.g., numeral-classifier-NPs, atelic VPs bounded
by grammatical devices) and their temporal and aspectual features, see Liu (1997) and Li (2017).
Due to space limitations, we are only able to present the NPs and VPs relevant to our acquisition data, as will be seen in the results section.

381

382

Ziyin Mai, Lucy Zhao, and Virginia Yip

Table 1. Nominal and verbal phrases as NP2 and VP in [(NP1)-ba-NP2-VP] (based on
Liu, 1997; Li, 2017 with minor modifications; examples and glosses our own)
Phrase Categories
NP2

Examples

1. Inherently definite or overtly marked as definite in Mandarin
A. Demonstrative phrase

na-ge yueqi `that musical instrument'

B. Pronoun

ta `him'

C. Proper name

Dawei `David'

2. Not inherently definite but interpretable as definite/specific in Mandarin

VP

D. Bare noun

qingwa `frog'

E. Possessor(-de)-NP

ta-de qingwa `his frog'

F. Quantified NP

zhengge canguan `whole restaurant'

Inherently telic or externally bounded
A. V-directional/locative
phrase

na-xialai `take down'
reng zai dishang `throw onto the floor'

B. Resultative verb
compound

shuai-po `drop-break'

C. [V-de] resultative

xia-de zuo zai dixia `scare-DE sit on floor (so scared that
(she) sat on the floor)'

D. V-frequency/duration
adjunct

yao-le yi xia `bite ASP one CL' (take one bite)

E. V-indirect object

huan gei wo `return to me'

The ba-construction does not have a close structural equivalent in English.
Adult heritage speakers of Mandarin are able to reject ungrammatical
ba-sentences with NP2 denoting agent or causer while accepting their grammatical counterparts (Mai & Yip, 2015). In production tasks, however, adult Englishdominant heritage speakers of Chinese (Mandarin or Cantonese) consistently
underuse the ba-construction or the zoeng-construction (structural equivalent of
the ba-construction in Cantonese Chinese) while adhering to the canonical SVO
word order in discourse and pragmatic contexts where the ba/zoeng-construction
is more appropriate, contrasting with speakers who are native and dominant in
Chinese (Polinsky, Zhang, & Gomez Gallo, 2010; Mai et al., 2018).
In the absence of published findings for pre-school Chinese-English bilinguals, we made use of the new Child Heritage Chinese Corpus (CHCC, Mai,
Matthews & Yip, in prep) in CHILDES, which documents the development of
Chinese in heritage children in the US. We searched for ba-utterances spontaneously produced by Luna, a sequential Mandarin-English heritage bilingual who

Ba-construction in child heritage Mandarin

received Mandarin input from her Mandarin-speaking parents and English input
through daycare and schooling. After screening out utterances that are direct imitation of adult utterances, self-repetition, incomplete or unintelligible, we found
26 tokens of ba-utterances out of a total of 7261 utterances recorded between 2;0
and 3;11 (production rate .36%). All of Luna's ba-utterances appeared in the target [(NP1)-ba-NP2-VP] form, except for one token at 2;5, where NP2 was omitted.
The VPs consisted of 12 unique verbs (e.g., fang `to put', na `to take', fan `to flip') in
a variety of complex verbal structures (e.g., na-chulai `take out', fang-zai chuangshang `put on bed'), all bounded with temporal endpoints. The NPs in the NP2
position were demonstrative phrases, pronouns, bare nouns, and genitive structures, all felicitously interpretable as having a definite or specific reference in the
contexts. Overall, our analysis of the corpus data suggests that heritage Mandarin
children in an English-dominant country are able to produce the ba-construction
spontaneously and felicitously by age 4.

4.

This study

4.1 Research questions and predictions
Can the low productivity of the ba-construction observed in adult heritage Chinese speakers in previous studies be traced back to differential acquisition of the
construction at school age? Does parental input in the heritage language play a
role in retaining this structure in heritage bilinguals at school age? This study
investigates the structure of the ba-construction in school-age heritage speakers of
Mandarin in the UK, and examines the relations between their production of the
ba-construction and properties of the heritage language input. Specifically, we ask
the following research questions:
i.

How does the ba-construction produced by school-age heritage speakers of
Mandarin compare to their parental input in terms of (i) structural frequency,
(ii) the linear structure of [(NP1)-ba-NP2-VP], and (iii) the types of nominal
and verbal phrases in NP2 and VP?

Predictions: Our own analysis of Luna's spontaneous utterances and the previous
studies on adult heritage speakers of Mandarin (Polinsky et al., 2010; Mai &
Yip, 2015) as reviewed in Section 3 show that the ba-construction produced or
accepted by pre-school and adult heritage speakers is largely well-formed and
felicitous by homeland standards, but it is produced less frequently by adult heritage speakers than their peers from the homeland. If a similar pattern is found

383

384

Ziyin Mai, Lucy Zhao, and Virginia Yip

with school-age heritage speakers, the low frequency of the ba-construction in
adult heritage Chinese speakers can be traced back to the school age.
ii. Are there any correlations between the heritage children and their parental
input in terms of frequency of the ba-construction and lexical diversity?
Predictions: At the structural level, if the frequency of the ba-construction in the
heritage input plays a role in sustaining the construction in the heritage grammar (that is, children who hear the ba-construction more frequently are able to
produce the construction more frequently), there should be a positive correlation between the heritage children and their parents in terms of frequency of the
ba-construction (abbreviated as CR1 in Figure 1). At the lexical level, recall that
the functional head ba obligatorily takes a verbal projection (vP) as its complement and generates syntactic positions that have to be filled by appropriate lexical
categories (NP2 and VP). Importantly, the events denoted by this verbal phrase
have to be bounded, which means a semantically restricted set of NPs and VPs are
allowed in the NP2 and VP positions (Table 1). Given this special demand in lexical selection imposed by the ba-construction, children with a more diverse range
of lexical resources to encode events in the desired manner should have an advantage producing target-like ba-construction (CR2 in Figure 1). Linking this up with
input, since previous studies have shown that lexical diversity in children correlates positively with that in their input (Huttenlocher et al., 2010; Rowe, 2012), it
is possible that heritage children who have a larger lexicon have benefited from
greater lexical diversity in their input (CR3 in Figure 1). Therefore, we should be
able to find a positive correlation between the frequency of the ba-construction
in the heritage children's production and lexical diversity in the heritage input,
which would be a correlation between the input and the acquisition outcomes
crossing syntax and the lexicon (CR4 in Figure 1).

4.2 Participants
We recruited our heritage participants in Sheffield, UK, where Chinese families
enrolled their children in Saturday Mandarin classes offered by a local institution.
We made special efforts to control for sociolinguistic variables such as age of
arrival, language use in the family, onset of bilingualism, and type of schooling. To
this end, a parental questionnaire collecting information about the parents' age,
education, occupation, immigration history and language background, as well as
the children's age and exposure to Chinese and English was sent to the Chinese
families through the institution.
A total of 18 families fit the following recruitment criteria and were thus
included in this study: both parents were native and literate speakers of Mandarin

Ba-construction in child heritage Mandarin

Figure 1. Predicted correlations (CR1-CR4) between the input and the acquisition
outcomes within and across syntactic and lexical domains in school-age heritage speakers

originally from mainland China, who had arrived in the UK in their adulthood;
the child was born and raised in the UK, attending schools with English as the
only medium of instruction; Mandarin had been used as the primary, if not exclusive, language for communication between the child and both parents; and the
child had regular exposure to English no later than the age of 4 through nursery or
preschool. 2 The mothers also reported their education levels on a scale from 1 to
5 (1 = primary, 2 = GCSE, 3 = A-level, 4 = university, 5 = postgraduate). Their average education level was between GCSE and A-level at 2.67 (SD = 1.271, Min = 1,
Max = 5).
In each family, one parent and all children aged between 4 and 14 were invited
to a narrative production task. A total of 45 participants (18 parents and 27 children) completed the task. Among the 18 families, five had two children participating in the study, and two had three. The 27 children had a mean age of 7.89
years (SD = 2.423, 15 females). Figure 2 presents the distribution of age. The parents also reported how often they brought the child to visit family and relatives in
China. On a scale from 0 to 5 (0 = never, 1 = less than once a year, 2 = once a year,
3 = more than once a year, 4 = more than twice a year), the average rating lies at 1.21
2. We did not consider birth order effects, which is a limitation of our study.

385

386

Ziyin Mai, Lucy Zhao, and Virginia Yip

(SD = 1.103, Min = 0, Max = 4). Seven children never travelled to these areas, and
one of them visited more than twice a year.
The 18 parents (5 fathers and 13 mothers) were between 30 and 53 years at
the time of data collection (M = 36.94, SD = 5.96). Their self-reported English abilities clustered at the lower-end on the proficiency scale from 0 (none) to 3 (nearnative) (M = .94, SD = .73, Min = 0, Max = 2). This study included parents of the
target heritage children as the main reference for child-adult comparisons, as
there is evidence that the language spoken by the first-generation immigrants,
who are bilingual speakers themselves and provide the main source of heritage
language input when the child is growing up, may have already been affected by
cross-linguistic influence and/or attrition (Montrul & Sanchez-Walker, 2013).

Figure 2. Age distribution of the participating children (n = 27)

4.3 Tasks and procedures
Six postgraduate students and language teachers who were highly proficient in
both Mandarin and English were recruited as research assistants locally in
Sheffield and received training on the data collection procedures. The parents
and children met with a research assistant separately and individually in a quiet
classroom. Following the standard procedures in Berman and Slobin (1994, p. 22),
the parents were presented with two wordless picture books Frog, where are you
(Mayer, 1969) and Frog goes to dinner (Mayer, 1974) and were instructed to look
through the books and tell the stories page by page in Mandarin. In addition, the
parents were told that they should tell the stories in the way they usually did to
their own children. When examining the input factor in heritage children, the

Ba-construction in child heritage Mandarin

majority of the existing studies have tried to "reconstruct" the heritage input by
comparing the language of first generation adults and second generation adults
who are unrelated with each other (e.g., Montrul & Sanchez-Walker, 2013; Pascual
y Cabo, 2020). This study is one of the very few studies that has collected and
analysed data from both parents and children (see also Paradis & Navarro, 2003).
Admittedly, the parents' narratives obtained in this task are only an approximation, rather than an actual sample of the parental input in parent-child interactions in the participants' real life, but the task has the advantage of recording the
actual language of the input providers without having to tease out the role of the
child's output on the child-directed speech.
The children met a research assistant individually twice to tell the frog stories
first in Mandarin, and then in English, with one-week intervals in between. This
order was to avoid potential priming effects of English on Mandarin, the target
language in this study. The research assistants provided no verbal feedback on the
language or content, except that in a few cases, neutral comments and prompts
like "anything else?" and "go on" were employed to encourage the younger children. The parents' and the children's story telling sessions were conducted separately without each other's presence. The research assistants were randomly
assigned to the participants and data collection meetings, and the second author
of this article coordinated and supervised the data collection sessions in Sheffield
to ensure quality and consistency.

4.4 Transcription and coding
The frog story narratives were recorded and the utterances produced by children
and adults transcribed and segmented into words in the CHAT format
(MacWhinney, 2000). The transcribers were native or highly proficient speakers
of Mandarin and English with linguistic training. Each transcript underwent two
rounds of checking by the first author and a research assistant. Discrepancies
between transcribers were identified and discussed until consensus were reached.
Morphological tiers were created for the transcripts, using the automatic part-ofspeech tagging function in MOR (MacWhinney, 2000).
We delineated the narratives following the definition of "clause" in Berman
and Slobin (1994: pp. 660-664). That is, a clause is a verbal phrase expressing a
single situation (activity, event, state). In English, this included single-verb clauses
(he looks into the mirror), as well as modals, auxiliaries and matrix verbs taking
infinitive or participle complements (want to go, started running), whether they
are in simple sentences or in the matrix or subordinate positions of complex sentences. Correspondingly in Mandarin, the following verb structures are considered as a single clause: modal verbs taking verbal complements (e.g., yinggai qu

387

388

Ziyin Mai, Lucy Zhao, and Virginia Yip

`should go'), light verbs such as lai `come' and qu `go' taking verb complements
(e.g., qu zhao qingwa `go to find the frog'), VV compounds such as ganpao `drive
away', passive markers taking verb complements (e.g., bei tui xiaqu le `be pushed
down') and lexical verbs taking preverbal or postverbal prepositional phrases
such as chao shudong-li han `shout towards the tree hole'. However, the following
structures were considered as consisting of two or more clauses as they denote
more than one situation: [VP1VP2] (e.g., daishang xiaogou zhao qingwa `take the
dog to look for the frog'), perception verbs such as kanjian `see', tingjian `hear' and
juede `think' taking clausal complements (e.g., kanjian qingwa zai tiaowu `see the
frog dancing'), resultative V-de compound taking complements (e.g., xia-de tiao
xialai `he got so frightened that (he) jumped off '), existential you taking clausal
complements (e.g., you qingwa zai shuijiao `(there) exists a frog sleeping'), relative clauses, adjunct clauses (temporal, conditional, etc.), and serial verb constructions as in [V1OV2] (zhui-zhe gou bu fang `chase the dog and not let (it) go').3

4.5 The homeland variety: The Beijing group
To better understand parent-child similarities and differences in the UK participants, we included in this study an analysis of frog story narratives by a group of
Beijing Mandarin speakers in the Guo Corpus (Chen & Guo, 2010) in CHILDES.
Children in the Guo Corpus were recruited from local schools in Beijing and
the adults were undergraduate students in two universities in Beijing (Chen &
Guo, 2010, hereafter the "Beijing group"). We selected from the Guo Corpus four
groups of child participants (4, 5, 7 & 9 years, n = 48) to match our UK children in
age (4 to 14), and the 20-year-old group (n = 12) to match the UK parents.
Notice that there are methodological differences between our narrative task
with the UK participants and the task used for the Guo Corpus. The child and
adult participants in the Guo Corpus were invited to tell only one frog story (i.e.,
"Frog where are you?"), whereas the participants in our study told two stories in
a row (i.e., "Frog where are you?" and "Frog goes to dinner"). Thus, our study has
a richer set of narrative data for each individual than the Guo Corpus. Another
difference is that the Beijing group did not have parent-child pairs as in the UK
group, and the adult speakers in the Guo Corpus were not instructed to tell the
story in a child-friendly manner as in our study. Finally, the age range of the
3. In Mandarin, modals, auxiliaries and matrix verbs are not usually morphologically marked
and there are on-going debates as to what constitutes a clause and how finiteness is encoded in
Mandarin syntax (Zhang, 2016). This study does not attempt to settle this theoretical debate.
Rather, we established the coding criteria for Mandarin clauses so that the Mandarin results are
maximally comparable with the English results in later analysis.

Ba-construction in child heritage Mandarin

children in the Beijing group (4-7 years) only partially overlaps with that of the
UK children. Despite this discrepancy in the experimental design, the Guo Corpus is the most comparable homeland-variety reference available and proves to
be instrumental in shedding light on the child-adult differences and similarities
found in the UK group.
The Beijing data was coded following procedures identical to those established
for the UK dataset. Nonetheless, given the methodological differences, the two
datasets were dealt with separately in the statistical analysis. Statistical tests on
group differences were performed between children and adults within each
dataset, rather than across datasets. No attempt was made to ascertain whether the
input provided by the UK parents was reduced in amount, proportion or diversity.

5.

Results

5.1 Words and clauses in the UK group
As the first step, we calculated the number of clauses and the number of word
tokens for each participant, which were taken as indices of the participants' general proficiency and "talkativeness" in Mandarin.4 For the heritage children, we
also calculated the number of clauses in their English narratives as an indicator of
their English proficiency.
For frequency of the ba-construction, we extracted the ba-utterances using
the KWAL command in CLAN and calculated both the absolute number of
tokens and their percentages among total clauses for each participant. In total, the
children and the parents produced 83 and 176 ba-utterances respectively. Ten of
the children did not produce ba-utterances at all, whereas all parents produced at
least one token. For lexical diversity, we calculated the number of unique words
("word types", including both lexical and functional words) in a participant's narrative, using the FREQ command in CLAN.5 Table 2 presents the descriptive statistics.
4. Verbless clauses, narrator comments on the narration task and conversations between the
narrator and the experimenter concerning the task were not counted in this analysis. Codemixing was extremely rare.
5. We did not adopt type-token ratio (TTR) to measure lexical diversity, because TTR has
been shown to vary as a function of sample length and is thus "flawed" when comparing language samples with different lengths (Covington & McFall, 2010). In our study, number of
unique words (word type) should be an appropriate measure for lexical diversity, as our participants were given the same set of pictures to describe in the narration task. Those who described
the pictures with more unique words should display greater lexical diversity.

389

390

Ziyin Mai, Lucy Zhao, and Virginia Yip

Since we have a relatively small sample and our data do not fit the assumptions of parametric tests, we conducted non-parametric tests to compare group
differences using IBM SPSS Statistics Version 25. Mann-Whitney U tests identified
significant differences between the children and the parents in all five variables
tested. That is, compared with the parents' narratives, the children's narratives had
fewer clauses (U = 26.500, p < .001), fewer word tokens (U = 25.500, p < .001), fewer
word types (U = 20.000, p < .001), fewer ba-utterances (U = 78.000, p < .001) and
smaller percentages of ba-utterances (U = 155.000, p = .040). A Wilcoxon Signed
Rank test found no statistically significant differences in terms of number of
clauses between the children's Mandarin and English narratives (Z = 160.00,
p = .694), suggesting balanced proficiency in Mandarin and English.
Table 2. Descriptive statistics of number of clauses, number of word tokens, number of
word types, number of ba-utterances (#ba) and percentage of ba-utterances in total
clauses (%ba) in Mandarin (M) and English (E) in the UK group (n = 45)
Mean

SD

Median

Q1

Q3

Skewness

Children (n = 27)
Clause (M)

81.89

32.532

79.00**

60.00

101.00

.574

Clause (E)

79.41

29.466

72.00

60.00

93.00

.929

Word token (M)

513.93 203.006

482.00**

376.00

650.00

.127

Word type (M)

125.30

40.882

124.00**

107.00

159.00

-.061

#ba

3.11

3.468

2.00**

.00

6.00

.927

%ba

3.57

4.160

2.00*

.00

6.00

1.150

191.78

82.811

167.00

124.00

243.50

1.057

1244.11 545.057

1239.50

758.75

1538.25

1.204

Parents (n = 18)
Clause (M)
Word token (M)
Word type (M)

267.56

90.429

267.00

198.00

322.00

.962

#ba

9.78

6.839

9.00

6.00

11.25

1.498

%ba

5.14

2.869

4.795

2.955

6.823

.573

Note. * and ** indicate significant difference from the parents (Mann Whitney U) at .05 and .01 levels.

5.2 NP2 and VP in the ba-construction in the UK group
The ba-utterances produced by the children and the parents all appeared in
[(NP1)-ba-NP2-VP]. The children and the parents omitted NP1 in 31% and 56% of
the cases respectively, suggesting that the children used fewer null subjects/topics
in this construction than their parents. Neither the children nor the parents omit-

Ba-construction in child heritage Mandarin

ted any NP2. Inspection of individual ba-utterances did not find any ungrammatical or infelicitous cases. The basic structure of [(NP1)-ba-NP2-VP] is intact in the
heritage grammar.
Figure 3 shows the distribution of different types of nominal phrases as NP2
in the children and their parents. In the children, 70% of the cases were expressions that are inherently definite or overtly marked as definite (i.e., demonstrative
phrases, personal pronouns and proper names, see Table 1 for examples), whereas
only 46% of the parents' NP2 belong to this category. Mann-Whitney U confirms
that the children produced significantly higher percentages of this type of NPs
than the parents (U = 233.500, p = .007). Note that the parents made considerable
use of bare noun (31%), which is not inherently definite but allows a definite interpretation in Mandarin, whereas the children did much less frequently (19%).

Figure 3. Types of NP2 in [(NP1)-ba-NP2-VP] in UK participants' two-story narratives
(n = 45) and Beijing participants' one-story narratives (n = 60) (NP types based on Liu,
1997; Li, 2017 with modifications)

Figure 4 shows the distribution of different types of VP. Both the children and
the parents constructed their ba-utterances primarily with (i) verbs taking directional or locational complements indicating change of location (64% in children,
51% in parents) and (ii) resultative verb compounds (RVCs) denoting change of
state (28% in children, 24% in parents). Mann-Whitney U shows that in combination, these two types of verbal structures take up a larger proportion in the
children's utterances (64% + 28% = 92%) than in the parents' (51% + 24% = 75%)
(U = 237.000, p = .005). Notice that the parents made use of three additional types

391

392

Ziyin Mai, Lucy Zhao, and Virginia Yip

of VPs including the V-de-XP construction which encodes the result of the action
in XP (8%), verbs taking quantified phrases such as duration and quantity
adjuncts (Huang et al., 2009: pp. 94) to delimit the event (8%) and verbs taking
indirect objects which signal the goal of the event (5%). These three types of VPs
were extremely rare in the children, if attested at all (0%, 0% and 2% respectively)
(examples in Table 1).

Figure 4. Types of VP in [(NP1)-ba-NP2-VP] in UK participants' two-story narratives
(n = 45) and Beijing participants' one-story narratives (n = 60) (VP types based on Liu,
1997; Li, 2017 with modifications)

In sum, the school-age heritage children were able to produce grammatical
and felicitous ba-utterances in elicited narration, but the nominal and verbal
phrases they employed in their ba-utterances only constitute a subset of those
instantiated in their parents' input.

5.3 The Beijing group
For the Beijing group, we calculated the number of clauses, the token number of
ba-utterances and the percentage of ba-utterances in the total clauses. Since words
are not consistently separated from each other in the transcripts of the Guo Corpus, we did not calculate the number of word tokens or that of word types. In
total, the children (n = 48) produced 189 ba-utterances and the adults (n = 12) produced 60 of them. The descriptive results are presented in Table 3.

Ba-construction in child heritage Mandarin

Nonparametric tests were performed to compare between the 48 children
and the 12 adults on the one hand, and among the five age groups (4, 5, 7, 9,
20 years) on the other. None of the tests found significant differences at either
level of comparison. The children (n = 48) and the adults (n = 12) did not differ
from each other in terms of number of clauses produced (U = 328.500, p = .454),
number of ba-utterances (U = 352.500, p = .228), or percentage of ba-utterances
(U = 357.000, p = .202). The five age groups did not differ in terms of number of
clauses (H(4) = 3.214, p = .523), number of ba-utterances (H(4) = 4.155, p = .385), or
percentage of ba-utterances (H(4) = 2.907, p = .574).
Table 3. Descriptive statistics of number of clauses, number of ba-utterances ("#ba") and
percentage of ba-phrases in total clauses ("%ba") in the Mandarin narratives in Guo
Corpus (Chen & Guo, 2010) in CHILDES (Beijing group, n = 60)
Children
Age group

4yrs

5yrs

7yrs

9yrs

Total

20yrs

12

12

12

12

48

12

Mean

65.92

64.83

79.50

73.42

70.92

78.08

SD

17.906

14.371

30.363

16.251

20.909

24.905

Median

62.00

60.50

68.50

70.50

65.50

77.00

Mean

3.33

3.00

5.42

4.00

3.94

5.00

SD

1.614

2.089

3.848

2.296

2.685

3.133

Median

3.00

3.00

4.00

4.00

3.50

4.50

Mean

5.19

4.73

6.45

5.45

5.45

6.70

SD

2.366

3.421

2.691

2.729

2.809

3.625

Median

4.95

4.58

6.73

5.27

5.17

7.42

n
Clauses

#ba

%ba

Adults

The analyses of the NP2 and the VP are included in Figure 4 respectively. Following the analysis of the UK data, Mann Whitney U tests were used to make
comparisons between the children and the adults for two clusters of NPs and VPs:
(i) NPs that are inherently definite or overtly marked as definite, and (ii) verbs
taking directional/locational complements and RVC. Results showed no significant differences between the two groups in either cluster (i) (U = 242.500, p = .992)
or cluster (ii) (U = 218.00, p = .595), which is a sharp contrast to the pattern found
in the UK group.

393

394

Ziyin Mai, Lucy Zhao, and Virginia Yip

5.4 Correlations in the UK group
Spearman's rank correlations were performed to examine correlations between
the parents and the children in terms of structural frequency of the
ba-construction and lexical diversity (details in Figure 1). Since some of the heritage children were siblings, to satisfy assumptions of independent observations
in correlation tests, in this analysis we included only 18 parent-child pairs, who
were the parents and their youngest, if not the only child that participated in this
study, assuming that parental input typically takes up a greater proportion of the
total input received by the child when the child is younger and spends more time
at home and with parents. This procedure temporarily removed 9 children from
the original dataset and resulted in an 18-participant subset.
Figure 5 reports descriptive statistics of this subset group and results of the
four predicted correlations (CR1-4). As described in Section 5.1, structural frequency is operationalized as the percentage of ba-utterances among total clauses,
and lexical diversity the number of word types. Spearman's ranks revealed a
medium-to-strong positive correlation between lexical diversity in the parents'
narratives and frequency of the ba-construction in the children's narratives (CR4,
rs = .639, p = .004, scatterplot shown in Figure 6). Correlation between the children's lexical diversity and the frequency of the ba-construction in their narratives
(CR2) is approaching statistical significance (r = .447, p = .063). No significant linear relations were found between the input and the outcomes in either structural
frequency of the ba-construction (CR1) or lexical diversity (CR2).
Apart from those predicted in Figure 5, there are other factors, though not
the target of this study, that may potentially shape the heritage grammar. Parents'
general talkativeness (measurable by the number of clauses and word tokens in
the parents' narratives as reported in Table 2) may have a role, for children who
produced ba-utterances more frequently may have simply benefited from hearing
more talk in Mandarin from their parents. Additionally, children's age, their general oral proficiency in Mandarin and English may also correlate with their production of ba, because older children, who were presumably more proficient in
the majority language, may have produced ba less frequently due to attrition of
the heritage language, compared with younger children, who might be less proficient in the majority language. To evaluate these possibilities and provide references for future studies, we ran additional Spearman's correlations to test the
relations between the frequency of the ba-construction in the children's production on the one hand, and each of the following five variables on the other: children's age, children's clause number in Mandarin, children's clause number in
English, parents' clause number, and parents' word token number. None of the
five tests showed significant correlation relations.

Ba-construction in child heritage Mandarin

Figure 5. Descriptive statistics and Spearman's rank correlations (CR1-4) between four
input and outcome variables in the UK heritage children (n = 18)

Figure 6. Scatterplot of structural frequency of the ba-construction in the children
against lexical diversity in the parents (n = 18)

395

396

Ziyin Mai, Lucy Zhao, and Virginia Yip

6.

Discussion

6.1 Summary of main findings
The heritage children in our study were early bilinguals of Mandarin and English,
who, according to parental reports, had received naturalistic Mandarin input
from native speakers and were still using Mandarin at home at the time of this
study. Our analysis of clause number and word token number in their narratives
shows that the children were quite balanced between Mandarin and English,
although less productive than their parents in Mandarin.
In our first research question, we asked whether there are differences between
school-age heritage children and their parents in terms of frequency, structure
and lexical composition of the ba-construction. We found that whilst the heritage
children produced the ba-construction less frequently than their parents, the
basic structure of [(NP1)-ba-NP2-VP] is retained in the heritage grammar, consistent with previous findings of relatively robust syntax in heritage Chinese (Mai &
Deng, 2019) and other heritage languages (e.g., Flores, 2012). Nevertheless, compared with their parents, the children relied on a rather limited set of nominal
and verbal phrases such as overtly-marked or inherently definite NPs and directional/locational VP phrases and RVCs to construct their ba-utterances. Importantly, the above child-adult differences in the UK group were not attested in their
homeland counterparts in Beijing. Thus, the lower frequency of the structure and
reduced diversity of the nominal and verbal phrases in the heritage children's
ba-construction cannot be attributed to general child-adult differences. Rather,
they are attributable to the context in which Mandarin was acquired by the UK
children, namely, in a Mandarin-English bilingual context.
Our second research question investigates correlations between the parental
input and the heritage outcomes in terms of structural frequency of the
ba-construction (percentage of ba-utterances in total clauses) and general lexical
diversity (number of unique words/word types in the narrative). Correlation
analysis (Figure 5) shows a significant positive correlation between the structural
frequency in the children and lexical diversity in the parents, and within the
children a near-significant positive correlation between frequency of the
ba-construction and lexical diversity. Crucially, there is no correlation between
the children and the parents in terms of frequency of the ba-construction. This
indicates that by school-age, structural frequency in the parental input no longer
forms a straightforward linear relation with that in the children's output, if there
is such a relation in earlier development at all. For school-age heritage children,
hearing more ba-utterances from the parents does not necessarily boost their production of the ba-construction.

Ba-construction in child heritage Mandarin

6.2 Simplification of the ba-construction in the heritage language
In the ba-construction, over-reliance on overtly-marked or inherently definite
NPs in the NP2 position such as demonstrative DPs and pronouns was found
in the heritage children, but not in the monolingual children, which points to
possible cross-linguistic influence from English. English obligatorily marks the
definiteness of NPs through overt markers such as demonstratives and articles
(Lyons, 1999), whereas Chinese lacks articles and conditionally allows bare NPs
to express definite meanings (Cheng & Sybesma, 1999). Chen and Lei (2012)
found that child heritage speakers of Mandarin in the US overproduced NPs with
overt definite markers when they re-introduced the story's characters, compared
with their monolingual peers in Beijing. Our study, adopting the primary input
providers' language as the baseline and focusing on a syntactic position requiring
definite or specific NPs, found the same pattern.
VPs in the ba-construction can be morphosyntactically quite complex (Paul,
2015). As shown in Figure 4, VPs with resultative de-phrases (V-de-XP) and verbs
taking quantified phrases such as duration and quantity adjuncts are missing from
the heritage children's ba-utterances, but both are produced at the rate of 8% by
the parents, as in (2) and (3). In V-de-XP, the particle de suffixes to the verb
and forms the [V-de] structure, which is a phonological unit and enters syntax
as a single word, taking an XP as its complement (Huang et al., 2009: 84). Verbparticle compounding of this kind is not attested in English. In terms of verbs taking quantified phrases, they have been analysed as adjuncts to V' (Huang et al.,
2009: 91). Our data cannot confirm whether the absence of these two types of
verbal phrases in the children's ba-utterances results from ba in heritage Mandarin inherently lacking the ability to select those verbal structures, or the heritage
grammar having difficulty forming those verbal structures in the first place.
(2) Ba-utterance with [V-de] resultative (UK parent)
(Qingwa) [ba [pangbian de nushi [xia-de yun le guoqu]]].
frog
ba side
de lady scare-de faint asp over
`(The frog) scared the lady (sitting) next to (him) and as a result she fainted.'
(3) Ba-utterance with the verb taking a quantity adjunct (UK parent)
(Tianshu) [ba [ta de bizi [yao le yi xia]]].
rat
ba 3sg poss nose bite asp one cl
`(The rat) bit him once in the nose.'

The ba-construction and the zoeng-construction (the equivalent of
ba-construction in Cantonese) have been deemed "vulnerable" and susceptible
to contact-induced language change in adult heritage speakers in the sense that
they are produced at a much lower rate by adult second-generation heritage

397

398

Ziyin Mai, Lucy Zhao, and Virginia Yip

speakers than monolingual and first-generation bilingual speakers in disposal
contexts (Polinsky et al., 2010; Mai et al., 2018). This study has advanced our
understanding of the vulnerability on two dimensions: (i) it takes root from an
earlier period, namely, the late childhood and adolescence period, if not earlier;
and (ii) it lies in the range of NPs and VPs selected by ba, rather than the projection of the ba-phrase per se.
In Archaic Chinese, ba is an action verb meaning take, hold, seize, which gradually grammaticalized into the abstract functional head we see today (Peyraube,
1996). In Modern Chinese, the ba-construction has developed rich semantic functions expressing disposal, displacement, causative and affected meanings, among
others. A parallel development in its phrasal structure is that it allows a much
larger and more complex set of verbal materials to serve as complements of ba.
Nevertheless, our finding suggests that the heritage variety of the ba-construction
instantiates a smaller set of NPs and VPs than its input baseline, and seems to steer
towards an opposite direction and regress to a simplified version of the construction, as shown in (4), retaining some NPs and VPs and disfavouring the others
(see Polinsky, 2018, and Polinsky & Scontras, 2020 for a similar view).
(4) Ba-construction in heritage grammars
[S [ba [[definite NP] [resultative VP]]]]
Definite NP: demonstrative NP, pronoun, proper name
Resultative VP: directional/locational VP, RVC

6.3 Potential triggers for the simplification
Bilingual speakers are faced with the pressure of developing and maintaining two
language systems in tandem with limited cognitive resources. In response to such
pressure, they tend to employ optimization strategies to manage their language
behaviours (Muysken, 2013). We postulate that the simplified ba-construction in
(4) is an optimized structure created in response to the pressure of reduced input
in the heritage language, as well as cross-linguistic competition with the societal
dominant language, based on the observation that (4) is built upon NPs and VPs
that are both frequent in the input (see distribution in the UK parents in Figure 4)
and have cross-linguistic equivalents in the heritage and societal majority languages.
This is obvious for demonstrative NPs, pronouns and proper names, which
are unambiguously definite in both Mandarin and English, as well as for directional VPs (e.g., na-xialai `take down') and locational VPs (e.g., reng zai dishang
`throw onto the floor'), which explicitly encode the resultative state of the patient
of the relevant event in both languages, although the structures inevitably encom-

Ba-construction in child heritage Mandarin

pass subtle cross-linguistic differences. It is less straightforward for the RVC (e.g.,
zhua-zou `seize-away'), which lacks a close structural equivalent in English. Nevertheless, it has been found that English-Mandarin bilingual speakers establish
a mapping between RVC in Mandarin and the resultative construction in (5) in
English (Yuan & Zhao, 2011).
(5) [agent [activity [patient [resultative xp]]]]
Tom [hammered [the metal [flat]]]].

By contrast, structures that do not have close structural equivalents in the majority language, in this case English, or appear less frequently in the input are more
difficult to retain in the construction for heritage speakers. These include NPs
such as bare nouns with definite interpretations and VPs such as [V-de] resultative
constructions, illustrated in (2).
In this sense, (4) is in fact advantageous to the maintenance and long-term
survival of the ba-construction and ultimately the heritage speakers achieving
additive bilingualism in both Mandarin and English, as it prioritizes nominal and
verbal phrases that are instantiated in both the heritage and majority languages as
the building blocks of the construction. The ba-construction in (4) found in the
second-generation immigrants may be a better learning target for the third generation to acquire, given its increased simplicity and sustainability (see Polinsky &
Scontras, 2020 for a similar view).
In early bilingual acquisition, there have been debates on whether crosslinguistic influence may alter the path and outcome of grammatical development
and lead to qualitative differences between bilingual and monolingual grammars,
in contrast with quantitative ones such as delay or acceleration of acquisition
along the same path, although some delays can be so severe that monolinguallike competence is never reached and the differences become qualitative (Meisel,
2007; see Kupisch, 2019 for a review). Our findings identified robust quantitative
differences between the heritage children and their parents in the distribution
of NP and VP types in the ba-construction that are probably induced by crosslinguistic influence. Considering that the heritage children in our study were at a
transition stage where proportions of input and output in Mandarin were declining in general, unless there is a change of language environment or pedagogical
intervention, it is possible that these quantitative differences will remain, and the
missing NP and VP types will never enter the ba-construction in the heritage
grammar. However, this remains somewhat speculative because our children are
still in the process of developing.

399

400

Ziyin Mai, Lucy Zhao, and Virginia Yip

6.4 Role of input at the transition stage
The manner in which continued input in late childhood and adolescence is essential to the maintenance of language has only recently begun to generate empirical
interest. Correlational studies on immigrant populations have repeatedly shown
that continued parent-child interactions in the heritage language at home and
instructional support for the heritage language at school are associated with better
development and maintenance of the heritage language, especially after the child
has started schooling in the majority language (Duursma, Romero-Contreras,
Szuber, Proctor, Snow, August, & Calderon, 2007; Kupisch & Rothman, 2018).
Building on this, our study has examined which aspects within a grammatical
structure during this period (age 4-14) are sensitive to the reduction of the heritage input. Our findings show that the basic structure of the ba-construction is
resilient to the general reduction of heritage input, and that there is no linear
relation between the heritage children and their parents in terms of frequency of
the construction in their production. We attribute this to the "threshold effect"
of input in language development (Unsworth, 2019; Polinsky, 2018). Once the
heritage speakers have accumulated the critical mass of input to acquire the
phrasal structure of ba (most likely during early childhood before they enter primary school as shown in monolingual studies and our analysis of Luna's corpus
data), hearing more ba-utterances does not seem to bring their mastery of the
ba-construction up to a higher level.
Another main finding is the robust correlation between lexical diversity in
the parental input and the frequency of the ba-construction in the heritage children (CR4 in Figure 5). Note that this is an association crossing two generations
of Mandarin speakers and two linguistic domains (lexicon and syntax). In a crosssectional correlational study like ours, it is not possible to determine the direction of causality. However, given that the ba-construction is highly selective in the
temporal and aspectual semantics of the relevant events and correspondingly the
type of nominal and verbal phrases filling the NP2 and VP slots (Table 1), children who have a larger lexicon with diverse lexical resources to encode events
should produce the ba-construction with greater ease. In this light, a likely causal
relation is that increased lexical diversity in the parental input first facilitates lexical development in the children (CR3), which then increases the frequency of
the ba-construction in the children's production (CR2), resulting in a correlation
between the input and the outcomes crossing the syntactic and lexical domains
(CR4). Our data have provided robust evidence for CR4 and pointed towards
CR2, but have not been able to confirm the correlation between the parents and
the children in terms of lexical diversity in CR3, which may have to do with our
small sample size and potential limitations of the narration task in measuring lex-

Ba-construction in child heritage Mandarin

ical knowledge in heritage children. Future studies with dedicated tests for lexical
knowledge in the heritage language for the heritage children may provide a clearer
picture and further test our hypothesis.

7.

Conclusion

This study set out to investigate the structural and lexical properties of the
ba-construction in heritage Mandarin at the transition stage of heritage language
acquisition in order to fill the important research gap between early childhood
grammars and adult endstate grammars. An innovative feature of this study
involves the multi-dimensional comparisons conducted between generations
(second vs. first-generation immigrants), between languages (children's Mandarin
vs. English), and between locations (UK vs. Beijing). Although as a limitation
we did not record parent-child interactions directly or have direct evidence of
the precise amounts and proportions of input the children had received over the
years, our narration task provides a window into the language spoken by the heritage children and their current input providers, from which similarities and differences between the two varieties are revealed and inferences about the parental
input are drawn.
We have found that the basic structure of the ba-construction is reserved in
the heritage grammar, but the construction is produced with reduced frequency
and a reduced set of the subcategorized nominal and verbal phrases compared
with the parental input, which is potentially a simplification triggered by reduction of input in the heritage language and cross-linguistic influence from the societal majority language. Crucially, we have discovered that higher frequency of the
ba-construction in school-age heritage speakers is associated with greater lexical diversity, rather than higher frequency of the ba-construction, in the parental
input, which has led us to postulate a facilitative role of a lexically diverse input in
the maintenance of heritage grammar beyond early childhood.

Funding
Research funded by Chinese University of Hong Kong (Direct Grant for Research) to Ziyin
Mai and by General Research Fund from the Hong Kong Research Grants Council (Project no.
14632016) to Virginia Yip.

401

402

Ziyin Mai, Lucy Zhao, and Virginia Yip

Acknowledgements
We have benefited from discussions with a number of colleagues and friends: Stephen
Matthews, Boping Yuan, Xiangjun Deng, Elaine Lau, Jiangling Zhou and Qiao Zhang. We
gratefully acknowledge the support of participants and staff members at the Confucius Institute
at University of Sheffield in the UK. We have made significant improvements thanks to the
anonymous reviewers and LAB editor, Prof. Tanja Kupisch, who provided many helpful comments and suggestions. The following colleagues and research assistants have contributed to
this study in different ways: Aina Jiang, Xinqun Hu, Shanrong Xie, Yinyin Liang, Yujing Fan,
Yanxin Zhu, Jieyu Zhou, Yuqi Wu and Hannah Lam. We also thank members of three units
at the Chinese University of Hong Kong for their support: Childhood bilingualism research
Centre, University of Cambridge-CUHK Joint Laboratory for Bilingualism and CUHK-Peking
University-University System of Taiwan Joint Research Center for Language and Human Complexity.

References
Ambridge, B., Kidd, E., Rowland, C. F., & Theakston, A. L. (2015). The ubiquity of frequency
effects in first language acquisition. Journal of Child language, 42(2), 239-273.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S030500091400049X

Benmamoun, E., Montrul, S., & Polinsky, M. (2013). Heritage languages and their speakers:
Opportunities and challenges for linguistics. Theoretical Linguistics, 39(3-4), 129-181.
Berman, R. A. & Slobin, D. I. (1994). Relating events in narrative: A crosslinguistic
developmental study. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Chen, L. & Guo, J. (2010). From language structures to language use: A case from Mandarin
motion expression classification. Chinese Language and Discourse, 1(1), 31-65.
https://doi.org/10.1075/cld.1.1.02che

Chen, L. & Lei, J. (2012). The production of referring expressions in oral narratives of ChineseEnglish bilingual speakers and monolingual peers. Child Language Teaching and
Therapy, 29(1) 41-55. https://doi.org/10.1177/0265659012459527
Cheng, L. L. S., & Sybesma, R. (1999). Bare and not-so-bare nouns and the structure of NP.
Linguistic inquiry, 30(4), 509-542. https://doi.org/10.1162/002438999554192
Covington, M. A., & McFall, J. D. (2010). Cutting the Gordian knot: The moving-average
type-token ratio (MATTR). Journal of quantitative linguistics, 17(2), 94-100.
https://doi.org/10.1080/09296171003643098

Cui, X., & Zhao, L. X. (forthcoming). An event structure analysis of ba-constructions.
De Houwer, A. (2014). The absolute frequency of maternal input to bilingual and monolingual
children. In J. Paradis & T. Gruter (Eds.), Input and experience in bilingual development
(pp. 37-58). Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing.
Deng, X., Mai, Z. & Yip, V. (2018). An aspectual account of ba and bei constructions in child
Mandarin. First Language, 38(3). pp. 243-262. https://doi.org/10.1177/0142723717743363
Duursma, E., Romero-Contreras, S., Szuber, A., Proctor, P., Snow, C., August, D., &
Calderon, M. (2007). The role of home literacy and language environment on bilinguals'
English and Spanish vocabulary development. Applied Psycholinguistics, 28(1), 171-190.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0142716406070093

Ba-construction in child heritage Mandarin

Flores, C. (2012). Differential effects of language attrition in the domains of verb placement
and object expression. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 15(3), 550-567.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1366728911000666

Flores, C., Santos, A. L., Jesus, A., & Marques, R. (2017). Age and input effects in the
acquisition of mood in Heritage Portuguese. Journal of Child Language, 44(4), 795-828.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000222

Huang, C. T. J., Li, Y. H. A., & Li, Y. (2009). The Syntax of Chinese. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139166935
Huttenlocher, J., Waterfall, H., Vasilyeva, M., Vevea, J., & Hedges, L. V. (2010). Sources of
variability in children's language growth. Cognitive Psychology, 61(4), 343-365.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cogpsych.2010.08.002

Jia, R. & Paradis, J. (2015). The use of referring expressions in narratives by Mandarin heritage
language children and the role of language environment factors in predicting individual
differences. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 18(4), 737-752.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1366728914000728

Jia, R., & Paradis, J. (2020). The acquisition of relative clauses by Mandarin heritage language
children. Linguistic Approaches to Bilingualism, 10(2), 153-183.
https://doi.org/10.1075/lab.16015.jia

Kupisch, T. (2019). 2L1 Simultaneous bilinguals as heritage speakers. In M. Schmid & B. Kopke
(Eds.). The Oxford Handbook of Language Attrition (pp. 458-469). Oxford University
Press.
Kupisch, T., & Rothman, J. (2018). Terminology matters! Why difference is not incompleteness
and how early child bilinguals are heritage speakers. International Journal of Bilingualism,
22(5), 564-582. https://doi.org/10.1177/1367006916654355
Li, Y. H. A. (2017). Chinese ba . In M. Everaert, & H. C. Van Riemsdijk (Eds.), The Wiley
Blackwell companion to syntax (2nd edition), (pp. 1-72). John Wiley.
https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118358733.wbsyncom036

Liu, F. H. (1997). An aspectual analysis of ba . Journal of East Asian Linguistics, 6(1), 51-99.
https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1008287920948

Lyons, C. (1999). Definiteness. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511605789

MacWhinney, B. (2000). The CHILDES Project: Tools for Analyzing Talk. 3rd Edition.
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Mai, Z. & Yip, V. (2015). Causative ba-construction in heritage, second language and native
Chinese grammars. Paper presented at the 12th conference of Generative Approaches to
Language Acquisition (GALA 12), September 10-12, University of Nantes, Nantes, France.
Mai, Z., & Deng, X. (2019). Selective vulnerability and dominant language transfer in the
acquisition of the Chinese cleft construction by heritage speakers. Linguistic Approaches
to Bilingualism, 9(2), 202-227. https://doi.org/10.1075/lab.16040.mai
Mai, Z., Kwan, C. Y., & Yip, V. (2018). Expressing displacement in heritage Cantonese: Crosslinguistic influence and structural vulnerability. International Journal of Bilingualism,
22(6), 603-618. https://doi.org/10.1177/1367006916681084
Mai, Z., Matthews, S. & Yip, V. (in prep). Heritage Chinese in English contexts: The Child
Heritage Chinese Corpus.
Mayer, M. (1969). Frog, where are you? New York: Dial Books for Young Readers.
Mayer, M. (1974). Frog goes to dinner. New York: Dial Books for Young Readers.

403

404

Ziyin Mai, Lucy Zhao, and Virginia Yip

Meisel, J. (2007). On autonomous syntactic development in multiple first language acquisition.
In H. Caunt-Nulton, S. Kulatilake, & I. Woo (Eds.), 31st BUCLD Proceedings (pp.
26-45). Somerville: Cascadilla Press.
Montrul, S. (2018). Heritage language development: Connecting the dots. International
Journal of Bilingualism, 22(5), 530-546. https://doi.org/10.1177/1367006916654368
Montrul, S., & Ionin, T. (2010). Transfer effects in the interpretation of definite articles by
Spanish heritage speakers. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 13(4), 449-473.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1366728910000040

Montrul, S., & Sanchez-Walker, N. (2013). Differential object marking in child and adult
Spanish heritage speakers. Language Acquisition, 20(2), 109-132.
https://doi.org/10.1080/10489223.2013.766741

Montrul, S., Bhatt, R., & Girju, R. (2015). Differential object marking in Spanish, Hindi, and
Romanian as heritage languages. Language, 91(3), 564-610.
https://doi.org/10.1353/lan.2015.0035

Muysken, P. (2013). Language contact outcomes as the result of bilingual optimization
strategies. Bilingualism: Language and cognition, 16(4), 709-730.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1366728912000727

Paradis, J. & Navarro, S. (2003). Subject realization and crosslinguistic interference in the
bilingual acquisition of Spanish and English. Journal of Child Language, 30, 371-393.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000903005609

Paradis, J., & Gruter, T. (2014). Introduction to "Input and experience in bilingual
development". In J. Paradis & T. Gruter (Eds.), Input and experience in bilingual
development (pp. 1-14). Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing.
Pascual y Cabo, D. (2020). Examining the role of cross-generational attrition in the
development of Spanish as a heritage language: Evidence from gustar-like verbs.
Linguistic Approaches to Bilingualism, 3, 86-108. https://doi.org/10.1075/lab.15057.pas
Paul, W. (2015). New perspectives on Chinese syntax. Walter de Gruyter.
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110338775

Peyraube, A. (1996). Recent issues in Chinese historical syntax. In C.-T. J. Huang & Y.-H. A. Li
(Eds.), New horizons in Chinese linguistics (pp. 161-213). Springer, Dordrecht.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-009-1608-1_6

Pires, A., & Rothman, J. (2009). Disentangling sources of incomplete acquisition: An
explanation for competence divergence across heritage grammars. International Journal
of Bilingualism, 13(2), 211-238. https://doi.org/10.1177/1367006909339806
Polinsky, M. (2011). Reanalysis in adult heritage language: new evidence in support of attrition.
Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 33(2), 305-328.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S027226311000077X

Polinsky, M. (2018). Heritage languages and their speakers. Cambridge University Press.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781107252349

Polinsky, M., & Scontras, G. (2020). Understanding heritage languages. Bilingualism:
Language and Cognition, 23(1), 4-20. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1366728919000245
Polinsky, M., Zhang, B., & Gomez Gallo, C. (2010). Heritage Chinese: a new view from
production. Paper presented at Heritage Language Institute IV, University of California,
Los Angeles.
Rowe, M. L. (2012). A longitudinal investigation of the role of quantity and quality of childdirected speech in vocabulary development. Child development, 83(5), 1762-1774.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8624.2012.01805.x

Ba-construction in child heritage Mandarin

Rowe, M., & Snow, C. (2020). Analyzing input quality along three dimensions: Interactive,
linguistic, and conceptual. Journal of Child Language, 47(1), 5-21.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000919000655

Rowland, C. F., Pine, J. M., Lieven, E. V., & Theakston, A. L. (2003). Determinants of
acquisition order in wh-questions: Re-evaluating the role of caregiver speech. Journal of
Child Language, 30(3), 609-635. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000903005695
Silva-Corvalan, C. (2003). Linguistic consequences of reduced input in bilingual first language
acquisition. In S. Montrul & F. Ordonez (Eds.), Linguistic theory and language
development in Hispanic Languages (pp. 375-397). Cascadilla Press.
Tsao, F.-F. (1987). A topic-comment approach to the ba construction. Journal of Chinese
Linguistics, 15(1), 1-54.
Unsworth, S. (2019). Quantifying language experience in HL development. In M. S. Schmid &
B. Kopke (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of language attrition (pp. 434-445). Oxford
University Press.
Yuan, B., & Zhao, Y. (2011). Asymmetric syntactic and thematic reconfigurations in English
speakers' L2 Chinese resultative compound constructions. International journal of
bilingualism, 15(1), 38-55. https://doi.org/10.1177/1367006910371023
Zhang, N. N. (2016). Identifying Chinese dependent clauses in the forms of subjects. Journal of
East Asian Linguistics, 25(3), 275-311. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10831-016-9146-5

Address for correspondence
Ziyin Mai
Department of Linguistics and Translation
City University of Hong Kong
Tat Chee Avenue
Kowloon, Hong Kong 999077
China
ziyinmai@cityu.edu.hk
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2317-9926

Co-author information
Lucy Zhao
The University of Sheffield

Virginia Yip
Chinese University of Hong Kong

Lucy.Zhao@sheffield.ac.uk

vcymatthews@cuhk.edu.hk

Publication history
Date received: 3 April 2018
Date accepted: 21 December 2020
Published online: 18 February 2021

405

