Journal of Memory and Language 127 (2022) 104372

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Memory and Language
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jml

Orthographic priming from unrelated primes: Heterogeneous feedforward
inhibition predicted by associative learning
James S. Adelman a, *, Iliyana V. Trifonova a, b, c
a

Department of Psychology, University of Warwick, UK
Department of Psychology, University of York, UK
c
School of Psychology, University of East Anglia, UK
b

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Orthographic processing
Lexical decision
Masked priming
Associative learning

A common assumption among models of orthographic processing is that letter-word inhibitory relationships all
share the same strength: activity in the letter B has the same impact on a word like RACE as does equivalent
activity in the letter F. However, basic associative learning mechanisms imply that the existence of the neighbor
word FACE gives more opportunity to learn a negative weight from the neighbor letter F than from the nonneighbor letter B, leading to stronger negative letter-word weights for neighbor than non-neighbor letters. In
masked primed lexical decision, therefore, fity, a neighborly prime formed using neighbor letters, should be a
more inhibitory prime for RACE than bund (vice versa for LARK). We present simulations of weight learning
using Rescorla and Wagner's (1972) equations and three experiments consistent with this prediction. Further
simulations show heterogeneous feedforward connections from letters to words could contribute to phenomena
previously attributed to lexical competition.

Introduction
There's no I in TEAM, but that there's no R in TEAM is more important
for the reader who must discriminate the words TEAR, TERM, TRAM
and REAM from TEAM. Models of orthographic processing do not,
however, distinguish between the relationship between I and TEAM and
that between R and TEAM. Instead, the assumption is made that mis
matching letter information is equally discriminatory, regardless of the
wrong letter identity.
A canonical example of this assumption comes in the interactiveactivation model (McClelland & Rumelhart, 1981): In this model, a
single letter-word inhibitory connection weight parameter describes the
extent to which the activity of letter nodes leads to inhibitory input to
mismatching words. Although interactions from other model compo
nents complicate predictions, the direct effect of a wrong letter is the
same for all 25 (in English) possible wrong letters in this model, and in
every model (e.g., Adelman, 2011; Davis, 2010; Grainger & van Heuven,
2003; Norris, 2006) accounting for effects in orthographic priming
paradigms commonly used to study lexical selection, a similar equiva
lency holds even though the mechanisms differ.
The most common orthographic priming paradigm is form-primed
lexical decision (Forster, Davis, Schoknecht, & Carter, 1987). On each

trial, a mask is presented before a brief (ca. 50 ms) prime lower-case
letter string, which is followed by an upper-case target letter string;
the participant indicates whether the target is a real word or not. On
trials with word targets and nonword primes, latencies are shorter when
many letters are shared between prime and target than when only few
are (see Adelman et al., 2014, for a review). As such, a typical control
condition in these experiments has primes with no letters in common
with the corresponding targets. Although there is evidence that pro
nounceability or orthographic legality of control primes may affect la
tencies, the identity of letters in control primes as they relate to the
targets is not normally considered further, as they are universally
theoretically expected to have homogeneous effect.
From the perspective that the discriminations among words must be
learned, however, such homogeneity is far from expected. A learner has
more opportunity to learn that F is negative evidence for RACE - from
experiencing FACE, an orthographic neighbor (differing in a single letter;
Coltheart, Davelaar, Jonasson, & Besner, 1977) - than that learner does
to learn that B does not occur in RACE. Discriminating compound cues
with error-driven learning leads to negative association weights
(Rescorla & Wagner, 1972) because the positive prediction of the shared
part of the compound (ACE) is erroneous on non-consequential (FACE)
trials and must be counteracted by the uniquely non-consequential part

* Corresponding author at: Department of Psychology, University of Warwick, Gibbet Hill Road, Coventry CV4 7AL, UK.
E-mail address: J.S.Adelman@warwick.ac.uk (J.S. Adelman).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2022.104372
Received 8 July 2022; Received in revised form 22 August 2022; Accepted 22 August 2022
Available online 9 September 2022
0749-596X/(c) 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

J.S. Adelman and I.V. Trifonova

Journal of Memory and Language 127 (2022) 104372

D: Sloppy slots As the slot-coded model, except that when a letter was
presented in a position p, the nodes for that letter identity in all positions
2
q were activated to a level e- (q- p) , so that the correct position was on
with activity 1, and activity for nearby letter nodes for the same identity
decreases as distance increases.

(F is present when RACE is absent). Without the positive prediction to
counteract, when B occurs in items dissimilar to RACE, no learning of a
negative association should occur.
Said another way: Model weights learned in this way (i.e., by
Rescorla & Wagner's, 1972, rules and related formulations) reflect dif
ferences in conditional probability of the recipient word (conditional
contrasts; Shanks, 1995) between cases with and without the source
letter, in each of the relevant contexts. For a letter not in the word, the
only such non-zero contrast is that for the context of other letters (_ACE):
When the neighbor letter is present (F in FACE), the probability of the
recipient word (RACE) is zero, but when the neighbor letter is absent,
the probability of the recipient word is positive, but not necessarily one
(because there also exist LACE and MACE). The contrast between these
is negative, so when averaged together with the irrelevant zero con
trasts, a negative weight - conditioned inhibition - results.
The consequence for priming is that a neighborly prime constructed
from neighbor letters, such as fity-RACE, should have an inhibitory ef
fect compared to one constructed from non-neighbor letters, such as
bund-RACE. We present modeling that demonstrates that the relevant
negative weights are learned by the Rescorla and Wagner (1972)
learning rules, and two experiments that test the prediction for these
types of stimuli. We then present further simulations and another
experiment based on six-letter targets, and primes in which only two
letters are manipulated.

Vocabulary and word-level representations
All four-letter words in SUBTLEX-UK (van Heuven, Mandera, Keul
eers, & Brysbaert, 2014) had a representational unit in the model that
was connected to every letter-level unit with a to-be-learned weight. Its
response to any stimulus was the sum of weights connecting it to units
that were turned on by the stimulus. (This would be equivalent to the net
input in an interactive activation model.) That is, for a word i, the
response ri = ljwij where lj = 1 for letters (or bigrams) j present in the
stimulus, and lj = 0 for other letter-level units, except for the sloppy slots
model, where lj was the activity level described above.
Training
All weights were initiated at zero. Twenty million training trials were
run, drawing words to be presented from the vocabulary randomly with
probability in proportion to their SUBTLEX-UK frequency. The relevant
letter-level representations were turned on, and the response in all the
word units was calculated. The target ti for a word i was one for the
presented word, and zero for all other words. A proportion of the
discrepancy (error) between target and response is added to the weights
that produced the response. That is, wij  wij + lj(ti-ri) for all words i and
for all letters j, except that overlearning was not treated as error; no
change was made if ri > ti = 1 or ri < ti = 0. (This primarily ensures that
negative weights learned where discrimation is important - such as
neighborly letter links learned on trials with neighbors - are not pushed
back to zero on irrelevant learning trials where the prediction is negative
rather than zero.) The simulations presented here use a learning rate of
 = 0.002. Note that weights involving absent letters are not updated
(because lj = 0 for those letters), but both present and absent words have
corresponding weights updated.

Data availability
Simulation code (C++) and results, DMDX experimental files,
experimental data, and R code for experimental data analysis are
available from OSF https://osf.io/htcqn/ or from https://adelmanlab.
org/neighborly.
Simulations 1A-1D: Neighborly primes, four-letter stimuli
For the purposes of illustration, we trained four simple error-driven
learning models with vocabularies of four-letter words with different
sublexical orthographic representations. The purpose of training four
models was to demonstrate that the prediction is not a product of a
specific encoding scheme. The models make the same qualitative
predictions.

Testing stimuli
We selected 348 four-letter words that had a neighbor in each po
sition (from among 639 in our initial list constructed from a UNIX word
list1; this was 27% of the four-letter words) so that a (unique) nonword
neighborly prime could be constructed, formed of letters that when
substituted for another letter in the target another word was formed. No
attempt was made to control pronounceability, but most primes were
pronounceable, as the manner of construction tended to produce primes
whose consonant-vowel structure was the same as the target. Words
were paired such that the neighborly prime for each word of the pair
contained no letters that could form a word from the paired word by a
single substitution and so was a neutral control prime for the paired
word (e.g., bund is the neighborly prime of LARK, and the control prime
of RACE). Thus, the neighborly and control primes were not different
stimuli, they were just paired with different targets to create the
different conditions. Trial and error suggested that 174 was the maximal
number of pairs of unique words that we were able to construct within
this constraint and the requirement of the later experiments that the
number be a multiple of 3 for counterbalancing purposes.

Method
Letter-level representations
A: Slot-coded model Each letter had a distinct representational unit for
each of the four ordinal positions within a four-letter word. When a
stimulus was presented to the model, these were on if the letter was
present in that position in the stimulus, and off otherwise. An additional
unit that was always on was expected to learn a frequency-related bias.
This is the simplest method of coding position of letters as in the
McClelland and Rumelhart (1981) model.
B: Position-free letters model Each letter had a set of representational
units that encoded the number, but not the position of the letters. One of
these units was on whenever the letter occurred at least once in the
stimulus; another was on whenever the letter occurred at least twice in
the stimulus; and so on. In all other cases, the units were off. An addi
tional (bias) unit was always on. This was included to show that the
predicted result does not rely on any positional encoding.
C: Position-free letters and bigrams model As the position-free letters
model, except additionally, each possible open bigram (defined as or
dered pairs of [not necessarily adjacent] letters in a string - for instance,
WORD contains open bigrams W_O, W_R, W_D, O_R, O_D, R_D) had six
units similarly encoding number. This was included as the preceding
encoding was not able to distinguish anagrams; this dual encoding of
letters and bigrams is used in more recent iterations of open bigram
models (Snell, van Leipsig, Grainger, & Meeter, 2018).

Results
We presented each of the prime stimuli and measured the response in
the corresponding target word units. Table 1 shows that the models
produced more negative target responses from neighborly primes than
1
These stimuli were chosen from the UNIX word list before the simulations
were trained using SUBTLEX-UK. All the chosen word targets appeared in
SUBTLEX-UK.

2

J.S. Adelman and I.V. Trifonova

Journal of Memory and Language 127 (2022) 104372

a real English word or the left shift key if it was not. Following 12
practice trials, all trials from the relevant counterbalancing list were
presented in a new random order.
On each trial, DMDX (Forster & Forster, 2003) displayed the #####
mask for 500 ms, then the 12.5pt lower-case prime for 50 ms, then the
20pt upper-case target until response or a maximum of 3000 ms.
Feedback was given after incorrect responses only.

Table 1
Target responses to each prime type for the four models for the four-letter stimuli
in Simulations 1A-1D.
Prime type
Model

Identity

Control

1A: Slot-coded
1B: Letters
1C: Letters and bigrams
1D: Sloppy Slots

0.490
0.366
0.702
0.477

-
-
-
-

0.663
0.798
0.301
0.622

Neighborly
-
-
-
-

1.127
0.892
0.410
1.077

Results
Correct word responses with latencies between 150 and 1500 ms
whose targets received at least 60% correct responses were analyzed.
Mean latencies are displayed in Table 2. The latencies were analyzed
with a linear mixed effect model for the fixed effect of prime type; the
model with full random slopes of prime type on participant had singular
fit3, so only random intercepts for participant were included. The
omnibus ANOVA showed the prime types to differ significantly,  2(2) =
83.09, p <.001. All pairwise comparisons were significant; as predicted,
neighborly primes yielded significantly longer latencies than control
primes,  2(1) = 6.58, p =.010.

from controls, whereas identity primes produced facilitatory responses.
We interpret this prediction only ordinally, because the function that
links these activations to response times should be nonlinear (according
to any plausible model of how responses are made) and so other nu
merical properties (differences, ratios) of these predictions about acti
vation would not be borne out in response times. We also do not
interpret differences between models because (a) of nonlinearity be
tween activations and response times and (b) the Rescorla-Wagner
formulation allows more parameter variation than we have explored
and so any differences between model predictions are not fixed.

Experiment 2

Experiment 1
The first experiment tested the prediction in the standard primed
lexical decision paradigm.

To reduce a potential effect of temporal merging of prime and target
- that the f of fity and the ACE of RACE merge to form an illusory fACE -
the second experiment introduced a mask between prime and target.

Method

Method

Participants
After exclusion of non-native speakers (17), further participants with
accuracy below 75% (2), participants excess to counterbalancing (2),
and those whose data was lost to equipment failure (2), data of 54 un
dergraduate students receiving partial course credit2 were available for
analysis.

Participants
After exclusion of non-native speakers of English (19), data for 54
undergraduate participants receiving partial course credit were
available.
Stimuli, design and procedure
As Experiment 1, except a 30 ms presentation of %%%%% occurred
between prime and target.

Stimuli
We used the word targets and corresponding primes that were test
stimuli for the simulations. We constructed a nonword target from each
word target (in most cases, by altering only one letter) for which a
(unique) neighborly prime could be constructed, and further con
structed a control nonword prime for these nonword targets; these were
not balanced in the same way as the word primes as we had no hy
pothesis of interest regarding nonword latencies.

Results
Analysis proceeded as for Experiment 1; mean correct word latencies
are displayed in Table 2. Models with random slopes produced singular
fits so only random intercepts were included4. The omnibus ANOVA
showed the prime types to differ significantly,  2(2) = 13.63, p =.001.

Design
Lexical decision latencies to word targets were measured following
neighborly, neutral control and identity primes from all participants. Six
counterbalancing lists of 348 trials were constructed. First, two target
lists were constructed containing only one word of each pair, and the
nonword constructed from its partner (i.e., participants either saw RACE
and LIRK, or RAFE and LARK). From each, three lists were constructed,
each with an equal number of word and nonword targets associated with
each prime type, so that each prime-target combination occurred in
exactly one list.

Table 2
Mean correct word target response times (ms) in Experiments 1-3.
Prime type
Experiment
Four-letter stimuli
1: #####-prime-TARGET
2: #####-prime-%%%%%-TARGET
Six-letter stimuli
3: #######-prime-TARGET

Procedure
Participants were instructed that their task was to examine the
upper-case letter string on each trial and press the right shift key if it was

3

Identity

Control

Neighborly

630
642

656
646

667
655

692

717

727

There was no significant evidence that the missing random slopes yielded
superior fit,  2(5) = 2.67, p =.751. Other models we investigated led to the
same substantive conclusion regarding the comparison of neighborly and con
trol conditions, irrespective of the singular fit.
4
The singular model with random slopes did not have a significantly superior
fit,  2(10) = 8.29, p =.060. Other models we investigated led to the same
substantive conclusion regarding the comparison of neighborly and control
conditions, irrespective of the singular fit.

2

This sample size was determined as follows: All participants available to us
through this course credit scheme in a single academic year were allocated to
one of the two experiments presented here to produce equal final Ns. This, as
anticipated, yielded samples substantially larger than had been needed to
observe the effect in pilot work.
3

J.S. Adelman and I.V. Trifonova

Journal of Memory and Language 127 (2022) 104372

Method

Neighborly prime latencies significantly differed from the other prime
types; as predicted, neighborly primes yielded significantly longer la
tencies than control primes,  2(1) = 4.70, p =.030.

Participants
After exclusions of non-native speakers (36), participants with ac
curacy less than 75% (4) and the last-collected participants in some
counterbalancing lists to equate numbers across those lists (3), data from
84 participants were available for analysis. We sought (and obtained) a
larger number of participants5 than the preceding experiments due to
concerns regarding power: The manipulation was weaker because it
affected two out of six letters rather than four out of four.

Discussion of experiments 1 & 2
Experiments 1 and 2 both provided evidence in line with the pre
diction that primes composed solely of non-target letters from neighbors
of the target would lead to longer response times than primes composed
solely of letters not appearing in any neighbor. All the targets in these
experiments, due to the manner of stimulus construction, had a neighbor
in all (four) positions. Although having neighbors across all positions is
reasonably common among four-letter words, it is rare more generally.
This, and the use of the same stimuli in both experiments, can lead to a
concern regarding the generality of the findings. In the following,
therefore, we examine six-letter targets, and manipulate only two letters
of the prime.

Stimuli
The word stimuli from Simulations 2A-D were augmented with an
equal number of nonwords to act as lexical decision foils.
Design
Lexical decision latencies were measured following neighborly,
identity and control primes. Four counterbalancing lists were created,
all of which contained every target once. Each member of a word target
pairing was primed by the identity prime in two lists, and its partner in
the other two lists. In one of the lists where the target was not primed
with the identity prime, it was primed by the neighborly prime, and in
the last, it was primed by the control prime (its partner's neighborly
prime). This ensured that similar primes (the two neighborly primes
from the same pair) did not appear in the same list and ensured half of
trials were identity primed. We sought to increase the proportion of
identity primes (from a third in the preceding experiments to a half)
because of concerns regarding power: The manipulation was weaker,
and we believe that a high incidence of related primes increases priming
(cf. Bodner & Masson, 2001).

Simulations 2A-D: Neighborly primes, six-letter stimuli
Method
All simulations were run in the same way as Simulations 1A-D,
except that (a) the number of units was increased to accommodate sixletter words; (b) six-letter training stimuli were selected from
SUBTLEX-UK (van Heuven et al., 2014) that were listed with frequency
of at least 50 and were present in either or both of the UK and US spellcheck; and (c) new six-letter testing stimuli were used, selected as
described below.
Testing stimuli
We selected 180 six-letter words that had neighbors in at least two
positions. For each of these words, we constructed a neighborly prime
that included two of the letters that if substituted into the target would
produce a neighbor word, in the positions that they would do so, with
the four other positions filled with letters that were not in any neighbor.
Words were paired so that the neighborly prime for each word was a
control prime containing no neighbor letters for the other word, and the
non-neighbor letters were the same in the paired primes. For instance,
fxvzbx-PACING [facing, paving] and jxszbx-POKING [joking, posing]
were neighborly primes and targets in one pair. The non-neighbor letters
were chosen randomly from those not appearing in targets or their
neighbors, resulting in very few pronounceable primes.

Procedure
As Experiment 1, except the mask was #######.
Results
Analysis proceeded as for the prior experiments. Mean correct word
target response times are shown in Table 2. Models with random slopes
(for either or both of participants and items) returned singular fits, so we
report results from the model with random intercepts for participants
and items6. The omnibus ANOVA showed the prime types to differ
significantly,  2(2) = 105.77, p <.001. All pairwise comparisons were
significant; as predicted, neighborly primes yielded significantly longer
latencies than control primes,  2(1) = 5.56, p =.018.

Results

Discussion

As for the four-letter stimuli, the simulations with six-letter stimuli
showed more negative targets responses to the neighborly primes than
to the control primes, as can be seen in Table 3.

Experiment 3 replicated the finding from Experiments 1 and 2 that
primes containing non-target neighbor letters produced longer latencies
that primes that contained only non-target non-neighbor letters. It
generalized the result from primes that had four out of four such
neighbor letters to primes that had only two out of six such neighbor

Experiment 3
The prediction for the six-letter stimuli was thus the same as that for
the four-letter stimuli and was tested in the next experiment.

5
This was achieved by using all participants available to us in a year, rather
than splitting them over two related experiments, as was done for Experiments
1 and 2.
6
There was, however, evidence that random slopes improved the fit of the
model,  2(10) = 10.64, p =.032. Other models we investigated led to the same
substantive conclusion regarding the comparison of neighborly and control
conditions, irrespective of the singular fit. Models leading to the same sub
stantive conclusion included one with only random slopes for the identity vs.
control contrast. This model did not differ from the full random slopes model,
 2(6) = 0.94, p =.988. For this model, the omnibus comparison was  2(2) =
65.58, p <.001 and for the comparison of neighbourly and control primes  2(1)
= 5.61, p =.018.

Table 3
Target responses to each prime type for the four models for the six-letter stimuli
in Simulations 2A-2D.
Prime type
Model

Identity

Control

2A: Slot-coded
2B: Letters
2C: Letters and bigrams
2D: Sloppy Slots

0.516
0.404
0.852
0.567

-
-
-
-

0.419
0.637
0.214
0.513

Neighborly
-
-
-
-

0.742
0.766
0.285
0.874

4

J.S. Adelman and I.V. Trifonova

Journal of Memory and Language 127 (2022) 104372

letters, to longer targets with fewer neighbors generally, and to primes
that were unpronouncable rather than primes that were pronounceable.

lozy-LAZY and control primes.
Simulations 3A-3D8 with Van Heuven et al.'s (2001) stimuli - whose
results are in Table 4 - confirmed that the pattern arises as described
from associate learning. Thus, van Heuven et al.'s finding that shared
neighbor primes like laby-LAZY produce less facilitatory priming than
no-shared neighbor primes like lozy-LAZY, might not occur because
items like laby activate competitors like LADY which inhibit targets like
LAZY, but because the neighbor-position Z  LAZY connection
involving a unique letter is stronger than the non-neighbor-position A 
LAZY connection involving a shared letter.

General discussion
In all the experiments, primes constructed using non-target neighbor
letters led to longer latencies than primes constructed entirely of other
non-target letters. This effect was predicted from simple associative
learning theory because the reader has relevant experience that these
neighbor letters predict the absence of the target word when other cues
suggest it might be present. Interposing a mask between the prime and
target might have removed the effect if it were due to a simple form of
visual blending, but the effect remained.
The effect does not follow directly from letter-word links in current
models of orthographic processing. Moreover, there is little reason to
believe it could emerge from other interactive processes in models: For a
substantial effect of this type to arise as a result of lateral inhibition, at
least one relevant neighbor word would need to be activated by the
single constituent letter and remain active despite inhibitory influences
from (a) the three or five letters of the prime not in that neighbor and (b)
other words activated by the letters of the prime. An alternative expla
nation in which the neighbor is activated by some combination of prime
and target letters is not compatible with the rapid changes in letter
activation due to stimulus changes normally assumed in models, and in
any case is not compatible with the result that the observed effects is
preserved when the prime and target are separated by a mask7. The
present experiments therefore provide strong evidence for heteroge
neous connection strengths from the letter level to the word level. This
finding could lead to some reinterpretation of several previously re
ported effects in the orthographic processing literature. These phe
nomena previously attributed to lexical inhibition may be linked, at
least in part, to heterogeneous feedforward connections, as would be
predicted from associative learning. Such associative learning mecha
nisms are implicated throughout cognition and have been previously
investigated in a variety of psycholinguistic contexts (e.g., Baayen et al.,
2011; Ramscar et al., 2010). However, even where orthographic
learning has been included in larger models using associative rules (e.g.,
Hendrix, Ramscar & Baayen, 2019), the implications for orthographic
processing have not been fully explored.

Associative learning and the prime lexicality effect
Other previous priming experiments that have been taken in support
of the existence of lexical competition (lateral inhibition at the word
level) naturally used stimuli that differ in the learnability of the wrong
letters in the primes. Comparisons of word neighbor primes with
nonword neighbor primes cannot be done without comparing letters
with and without relevant learning opportunities. By definition, a word
neighbor prime like axle for ABLE contains a neighborly letter (x) that
should be strongly negatively associated with the target, whereas a
nonword neighbor prime does not. We investigated the consequences for
the effect of prime lexicality (in interaction with prime relatedness) in
the models trained for Simulations 1A-1D, with the stimuli of Davis and
Lupker (2006)'s Experiment 1, comparing priming effects of word and
nonword neighbor primes, relative to control primes, on word targets.
The results in Table 5 show that while responses are similar for word
and nonword control primes, word neighbor primes yieled a weaker
response than nonword neighbor primes. Although Davis and Lupker
(2006) found a reversal of the priming effect for word primes, and
therefore these simulations only partially explain the observed pattern,
Forster and Veres (1998) have found that the magnitude of this inter
action can be affected by strategic factors (based on the type of nonword
foil) so explaining this effect fully would always rely on the role of
decision-making mechanisms and not just lower-level connection
weights.
Methodological implication of the finding
Methodologically, this finding also emphasizes the importance of
fully reporting all primes for orthographic priming effects in lexical
decision involving supposedly unrelated letters; this includes the
assignment of each specific control prime for each target when primes
are re-used across conditions.

Associative learning and shared neighbor primes
Error-driven associative learning also predicts that positive associa
tions will differ in their strength; these associations would be weaker for
elements that are shared with a neighbor than those that are not. The
links from L, A and Y to LAZY will be weakened on learning trials when
LADY is learned, but not those from Z; in constrast, there are no learning
trials on which Z  LAZY is strongly unlearned and A  LAZY is not.
Therefore, a prime for LAZY that contains L, A and Y will be weaker than
one containing L, Z and Y. van Heuven, Dijkstra, Grainger, and Schrie
fers (2001) derived the same prediction regarding prime strength from
lateral inhibition in an interactive activation model and tested and
confirmed it in an experiment with Dutch four-letter words comparing of
shared neighbor primes like laby-LAZY, no-shared neighbor primes like

Conclusion
In sum, we have provided evidence for heterogeneous feedforward
Table 4
Target responses to each prime type for the four models for van Heuven et al.'s
(2001) Dutch stimuli in Simulations 3A-3D.
Prime type

7
The Spatial Coding Model (Davis, 2010) which has such inhibitory mech
anisms qualitatively produces the effect, but the magnitude of the effect is 0.2
cycles, which is considered equivalent to 0.2 ms, for Experiment 1, and less for
Experiment 2. One might be tempted to infer that this simply means the model's
inhibitory parameters should be increased but note that Trifonova and Adel
man's (2018) sandwich priming results suggest that the inhibitory influences in
this model are already too strong.

Model

No shared neighbor

Shared neighbor

Control

3A: Slot-coded
3B: Letters
3C: Letters and bigrams
3D: Sloppy Slots

0.152
0.041
0.192
0.139

0.097
0.035
0.129
0.102

-
-
-
-

0.247
0.199
0.197
0.333

8
Given the language of the stimuli, we trained a new set of models with fourletter words from SUBTLEX-NL (Keuleers, Brysbaert, & New, 2010) that
occurred in more than 2 documents in the same manner as Simulations 1A-D.

5

J.S. Adelman and I.V. Trifonova

Journal of Memory and Language 127 (2022) 104372

Declaration of Competing Interest

Table 5
Target responses to each prime type for the four models for Davis & Lupker's
(2006) Experiment 1 stimuli in Simulations 4A-4D.

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.

Prime lexicality
Nonword

Word

Prime relatedness:
Model

Neighbor

Control

4A: Slot-coded
4B: Letters
4C: Letters and bigrams
4D: Sloppy Slots

0.408
0.114
0.260
0.336

-
-
-
-

0.725
1.110
0.351
0.753

Neighbor

Control

0.123
- 0.014
- 0.016
0.091

-
-
-
-

References

0.701
1.124
0.343
0.732

Adelman, J. S. (2011). Letters in Time and Retinotopic Space. Psychological Review, 118,
570-582.
Adelman, J. S., Johnson, R. L., McCormick, S. F., McKague, M., Kinoshita, S.,
Bowers, J. S., ... Davis, C. J. (2014). A behavioral database for masked form priming.
Behavior Research Methods, 46, 1052-1067.
Baayen, R. H., Milin, P., Filipovic Durdevic, D., Hendrix, P., & Marelli, M. (2011). An
amorphous model for morphological processing in visual comprehension based on
naive discriminative learning. Psychological Review, 118, 438-482.
Bodner, G. E., & Masson, M. E. J. (2001). Prime validity affects masked repetition
priming: Evidence for an episodic resource account of priming. Journal of Memory &
Language, 45, 616-647.
Coltheart, M., Davelaar, E., Jonasson, J., & Besner, D. (1977). Access to the internal
lexicon. In S. Dornic (Ed.), Attention and performance VI (pp. 535-555). Erlbaum.
Davis, C. J. (2010). The spatial coding model of visual word identification. Psychological
Review, 117, 713-758. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0019738
Davis, C. J., & Lupker, S. J. (2006). Masked inhibitory priming in English: Evidence for
lexical inhibition. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 32, 668-687.
Forster, K. I., & Forster, J. C. (2003). DMDX: A Windows display program with
millisecond accuracy. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 35(1),
116-124.
Forster, K. I., Davis, C., Schoknecht, C., & Carter, R. (1987). Masked priming with
graphemically related forms: Repetition or partial activation? The Quarterly Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 39A, 211-251. https://doi.org/10.1080/
14640748708401785
Forster, K. I., & Veres, C. (1998). The prime lexicality effect: Form-priming as a function
of prime awareness, lexical status, and discrimination difficulty. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 24, 498-514.
Grainger, J., & van Heuven, W. J. B. (2003). Modeling letter position coding in printed
word perception. In P. Bonin (Ed.), The mental lexicon (pp. 1-23). Nova Science.
Hendrix, P., Ramscar, M., & Baayen, R. H. (2019). NDRA: A single route model of
response times in the reading aloud task based on discriminative learning. PLoS ONE,
14(7), e0218802.
Keuleers, E., Brysbaert, M., & New, B. (2010). SUBTLEX-NL: A new frequency measure
for Dutch words based on film subtitles. Behavior Research Methods, 42, 643-650.
McClelland, J. L., & Rumelhart, D. E. (1981). An interactive activation model of context
effects in letter perception: An account of basic findings. Psychological Review, 88,
375-407. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.88.5.375
Norris, D. (2006). The Bayesian reader: Explaining word recognition as an optimal
Bayesian decision process. Psychological Review, 113, 327-357. https://doi.org/
10.1037/0033-295X.113.2.327
Ramscar, M., Yarlett, D., Dye, M., Denny, K., & Thorpe, K. (2010). The effects of featurelabel-order and their implications for symbolic learning. Cognitive Science, 34(6),
909-957.
Rescorla, R. A., & Wagner, A. R. (1972). A theory of Pavlovian conditioning: Variations in
the effectiveness of reinforcement and nonreinforcement. In A. H. Black, &
W. F. Prokasy (Eds.), Classical conditioning II: Current research and theory (pp. 64-99).
Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Shanks, D. R. (1995). Is Human Learning Rational? The Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 48A, 257-279. https://doi.org/10.1080/14640749508401390
Snell, J., van Leipsig, S., Grainger, J., & Meeter, M. (2018). OB1-reader: A model of word
recognition and eye movements in text reading. Psychological Review, 125, 969-984.
Trifonova, I. V., & Adelman, J. S. (2018). The sandwich priming paradigm does not
reduce lexical competitor effects. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 44, 1743-1764.
van Heuven, W. J. B., Dijkstra, T., Grainger, J., & Schriefers, H. (2001). Shared
neighborhood effects in masked orthographic priming. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 8, 96-101.
van Heuven, W. J. B., Mandera, P., Keuleers, E., & Brysbaert, M. (2014). SUBTLEX-UK: A
new and improved word frequency database for British English. The Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 67, 1176-1190. https://doi.org/10.1080/
17470218.2013.850521

inhibition through empirical differences in efficacy between two prime
types both of which would previously have been considered unrelated
primes of equivalent quality. We anticipated such differences as a
generalization of conditioned inhibition in associative learning and
simulations based on associative learning theory predicted the qualita
tive pattern of our experiments. Similar simulations of other inhibitory
phenomena in orthographic priming suggest that inhibitory patterns
should not be automatically attributed to online lateral inhibition. Our
experimental results suggest that there is variation in the strength of
inhibitory negative letter-word associations. Moreover, our simulations
of these results produce variation in the strength of both positive and
negative associations that predict other experimental patterns that have
been attributed to lexical competition in the form of lateral inhibition.
Nevertheless, these simulations do not constitute complete models of the
priming process or visual word recognition, so it remains to be seen how
effectively a broader model incorporating such heterogeneous connec
tions can be compatible with a broader range of phenomena. At present,
it also remains to be seen whether any other theoretical account can
reasonably model the neighborly prime inhibition that has been
empirically demonstrated here.
Authorship
JSA conceived the idea, ran the simulations, selected stimuli,
analyzed the data, programmed and co-ordinated the running of
Experiment 3, and drafted the manuscript and its revision. IVT pro
grammed and ran Experiments 1 and 2 and checked the data analysis of
all experiments. Both authors revised the draft manuscripts.
Note
We thank David Harvey for conducting pilot work; Inchara Athreya,
Phoebe Exelby, Fizz Hunter, Fatima Hussain Kanwal, Davit Kim and
Jessica Theo-Chinwo for assistance with Experiment 3; and Zachary
Estes and Gordon Brown for helpful discussions.
This research did not receive any specific grant from funding
agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
James S. Adelman: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software,
Formal analysis, Investigation, Data curation, Supervision, Validation,
Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing. Iliyana V. Trifo
nova: Investigation, Software, Validation, Writing - review & editing.

6

