Language, Cognition and Neuroscience

ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/plcp21

ERPs reveal how semantic and syntactic processing
unfold across parafoveal and foveal vision during
sentence comprehension
Chuchu Li, Katherine J. Midgley & Phillip J. Holcomb
To cite this article: Chuchu Li, Katherine J. Midgley & Phillip J. Holcomb (2023) ERPs reveal
how semantic and syntactic processing unfold across parafoveal and foveal vision during
sentence comprehension, Language, Cognition and Neuroscience, 38:1, 88-104, DOI:
10.1080/23273798.2022.2091150
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/23273798.2022.2091150

Published online: 23 Jun 2022.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 659

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 7 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=plcp21

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE
2023, VOL. 38, NO. 1, 88-104
https://doi.org/10.1080/23273798.2022.2091150

REGULAR ARTICLE

ERPs reveal how semantic and syntactic processing unfold across parafoveal and
foveal vision during sentence comprehension
Chuchu Lia, Katherine J. Midgleyb and Phillip J. Holcombb
a

Department of Psychology, University of California, San Diego, San Diego, CA, USA; bSan Diego State University, San Diego, CA, USA
ABSTRACT

ARTICLE HISTORY

We examined how readers process content and function words in sentence comprehension with
ERPs. Participants read simple declarative sentences using a rapid serial visual presentation (RSVP)
with flankers paradigm. Sentences contained either an unexpected semantically anomalous
content word, an unexpected syntactically anomalous function word or were well-formed with
no anomalies. ERPs were examined when target words were in the parafoveal or foveal vision.
Unexpected content words elicited a typically distributed N400 when displayed in the
parafovea, followed by a longer-lasting, widely distributed positivity starting around 300 ms
once foveated. Unexpected function words elicited a left lateralised LAN-like component when
presented in the parafovea, followed by a left lateralised, posteriorly distributed P600 when
foveated. These results suggested that both semantic and syntactic processing involve two
stages - the initial, fast process that can be completed in parafovea, followed by a more in
depth attentionally mediated assessment that occurs with direct attention.

Received 27 August 2021
Accepted 9 June 2022

Introduction
Readers process both semantic and syntactic information
to comprehend sentences, and content versus function
words are two classes of words that differ in the degree
to which they carry semantic versus syntactic information.
Content words like nouns (e.g. dog), lexical verbs (e.g.
eat), or adjectives (e.g. red) have rich semantic information. In contrast, function words like determiners (e.g.
the), pronouns (e.g. he), or prepositions (e.g. in) carry
little substantive meaning but reveal grammatical
relationships between content words (e.g. Neville et al.,
1992). This difference might explain why patients with
impaired grammatical analysis abilities due to Broca's
aphasia typically report difficulties in processing function
words (e.g. Caramazza & Zurif, 1976; Berndt & Caramazza,
1980; Friederici et al., 1993, Friederici 1985; Friederici &
Kilborn, 1989; Friederici et al., 1991; Pulvermuller, 1995;
Biassou et al., 1997). The investigation of neurological
differences in processing these two classes of words has
been conducted since the 1980s (e.g. Bradley & Garrett,
1983; Friederici, 1985; Friederici et al., 2000; Nobre et al.,
1997; Nobre & McCarthy, 1994). The present study
addressed this issue from a new perspective - instead
of directly comparing the processing of these two-word
classes, we instead examined differences during sentence
processing between expected and unexpected content
CONTACT Chuchu Li
92093-0948, USA

chl441@ucsd.edu

KEYWORDS

Reading; ERPs; parafoveal
and foveal processing;
semantic and syntactic
anomaly; N400; LAN; P600/
LPC

and function words using a modified rapid visual presentation (RSVP) paradigm. Importantly, using the eventrelated potential (ERP) methods, we examined how
readers process content and function words not only
when these words were presented in the fovea but also
just prior to foveation while they were presented in the
parafovea. This latter feature of the modified RSVP paradigm (henceforth RSVP with flankers) more closely
resembles natural reading.
Prior ERP studies have revealed how content and
function words are processed differently via directly
comparing them in reading tasks. When reading single
words or sentences that were presented one word at a
time in the standard RSVP paradigm, content words
tend to elicit more negative-going deflections that are
largest over central-parietal brain regions (Brown et al.,
1999; Neville et al., 1992; Nobre & McCarthy, 1994; ter
Keurs et al., 1999; but see Munte et al., 2001; Van
Petten & Kutas, 1991). These negativities typically peak
between 300 and 500 ms (N400) after word onset.
Because the N400 is generally larger in amplitude
when content words are not supported by the semantic
context of prior words in a sentence, this component has
been argued to reflect lexico-semantic operations
during sentence processing (Kutas & Hillyard, 1980,
1984). On the other hand, function words tend to elicit

Department of Psychology, University of California, San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, San Diego, CA

(c) 2022 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE

more negative-going deflections that are largest over
left anterior brain regions between 250 and 500 ms.
Neville et al. (1992) was the first to propose that such
left-anterior negativities (LANs) that reflect syntactic
operations specific to function words during sentence
processing (a component they identified as the N280),
although subsequent studies have questioned this
interpretation (ter Keurs et al., 1999; Brunelliere et al.,
2005; Osterhout et al., 1997). Other studies have
reported similar LAN-like components in paradigms
using word-category and agreement violations (e.g.
Coulson et al., 1998; Kim & Sikos, 2011; O'Rourke & Van
Petten, 2011; see Molinaro, Barber, & Carreiras, 2011
for a review; but see Tanner, Morgan-Short, & Luck,
2015). Such violations also tend to generate large posterior positivities referred to as the P600 (Osterhout &
Holcomb, 1992). Subsequent studies have shown that
the P600 is a positive-going deflection that peaks
around 600 ms post-stimulus onset and is sensitive to
grammatical anomalies and/or syntactic processing
difficulty (Osterhout et al., 1994), such as subject-verb
agreement violations (e.g. Hagoort et al., 1993), inflection violations (e.g. Friederici et al., 1993), or difficult syntactic integration even in grammatical sentences (e.g.
Kaan, Harris, Gibson, & Holcomb, 2000). In summary,
content and function words seem to engage, at least
to some degree different neural systems, likely due to
richer semantic features for the former (which contribute
to the N400) and richer syntactic features for the latter
(which contribute to the LAN and the P600).
The first aim of the present study was to examine how
content versus function words contribute differently to
semantic and syntactic processing during sentence processing. To accomplish this in some sentences (controls)
all content and function words were consistent with the
meaning and syntax of the sentence while in other
(experimental) sentences, either a content or function
word was replaced by another word belonging to the
same word class which rendered these sentences
difficult to process from this point on. This design
allows for two important controls over potentially confounding factors. First, the same sentence frames are
used in experimental and control sentences allowing
for the investigation of differences in ERP patterns elicited by unexpected content or function words while
holding sentence context constant. Second, by only contrasting control and experimental items within a wordclass variables such as word length and frequency are
controlled.
We focused on three ERP components, N400, LAN,
and P600. The N400, as described earlier, is a negative
shift that usually peaks around 400 ms after word
onset and sensitive to semantic anomalies. The LAN

89

and P600 are two ERP components that have been
shown to be sensitive to syntactic processing difficulties.
While an unexpected content word should elicit an
N400, an unexpected function word should elicit both
a LAN and a P600 given these two components
increased involvement in syntactic processing.
A second aim was to examine semantic and syntactic
violation effects in a more realistic sentence reading
task. Most of the research using ERPs to examine semantic and syntactic processing in sentences have adopted
the word-by-word RSVP paradigm where individual
words are presented at fixation. This approach is used
in order to minimise the role of saccadic artefacts
during natural sentence reading but also to provide an
unambiguous time-lock point (word onset) to assess
differences between conditions. However, the artificiality of this method of sentence reading leaves many
questions about the interpretation of differences
between conditions. In particular, there is ample evidence that during normal reading information from
words to the right of fixation influence processing
prior to their being fixated in central (foveal) vision
(e.g. Briihl & Inhoff, 1995; Gordon et al., 2013; Inhoff,
1989a, 1989b, 1990; Inhoff & Tousman, 1990; Pollatsek
et al., 1992; Rayner, 1998; but see Altarriba et al., 2001;
Rayner et al., 1986; Rayner & Morris, 1992; Mirault
et al., 2020). In particular, readers benefited from the
preview of a semantically plausible word, suggesting
early processing of parafoveal words regarding
whether they semantically fit previous context (Schotter
& Jia, 2016; Veldre & Andrews, 2016, 2018). A limitation
of the boundary change paradigm used in the above
studies was that there might be some confounding of
eye-movements and/or the presentation of parafoveal
words (e.g. the inclusion of both valid and invalid
preview). Although the traditional word-by-word RSVP
paradigm in ERP studies may address the confounding
issue, parafoveal information is not available in that
paradigm.
Some recent ERP studies support concerns about the
lack of parafoveal information in the traditional RSVP
paradigm. These studies strongly suggest that words
presented in parafoveal vision are not only processed
at a sub-lexical level but also receive some degree of
semantic analysis as evidenced by parafoveal N400
effects (Barber, Donamayor, Kutas, & Munte, 2010;
Barber et al., 2013; Li et al., 2015; Payne & Federmeier,
2017; Payne et al., 2019; Stites et al., 2017; Snell et al.,
2019; Meade et al., 2021; Mirault et al., 2020; but see
Dimigen, Kliegl, & Sommer, 2012). Barber and colleagues
(2010, 2013) developed the RSVP with flankers paradigm
to examine ERPs that are elicited by targets in the parafovea. In this paradigm, sentences are presented serially

90

C. LI ET AL.

in triads. Participants are instructed to fixate on the
target word at the centre, which is flanked by the
upcoming word in the sentence to the right, and the
preceding word to the left. Adopting this paradigm, previous research has found N400 effects that can be elicited by unexpected content words while they are still
in the parafovea - moreover, these effects have been
found in multiple languages (e.g. English and Hebrew
in Barber et al., 2010; Chinese in Li et al., 2015). Note
that in Hebrew the reading direction is from the right
to the left, so that the upcoming words that elicited parafoveal N400s were on the left of the central word. Stites
et al. (2017) further showed that this parafoveal N400
was continuously graded with increasing cloze probability, replicating the graded foveal N400 pattern that
is typically found in studies using the typical RSVP paradigm (e.g. Federmeier et al., 2007; Kutas & Hillyard, 1984;
Wlotko & Federmeier, 2012). Curiously, Stites et al. found
that the presence of a parafoveal N400 mitigated or
even eliminated the N400 when the unexpected word
was subsequently foveated. This seems to suggest that
readers did not only access the semantic information
of the target word when it is in the parafovea, but also
largely completed this semantic analysis before the
target is foveated. The influence of words in the parafovea has also been shown to influence the N400 in wordpair tasks. Using a trans-saccadic priming paradigm,
Grainger et al. (2016) found foveal-to-parafoveal lexical
priming effects on the N400.
Although semantic information has been processed
when the target word is in the parafovea, there is evidence that there is a second step that engages
readers' foveal attention on the target word to complete target word processing in a sentence context.
Using the RSVP with flankers paradigm, Payne et al.
(2019) found a posteriorly distributed late positive
component (LPC or P600-like component), when an
anomalous content word was fixated in the fovea.
This effect was not seen when these words were in
the parafovea. Importantly, this P600-like component
was only observed when participants were asked to
judge the plausibility of sentences and was not seen
when sentences were read passively for comprehension. This latter finding is consistent with Stites et al.
(2017) where participants completed a memory task
after sentence comprehension, in which a P600-like
effect was not observed when the target was foveated.
Payne et al. suggested that the foveal P600-like component reflects a higher-order and task-dependent
integrative process that engages foveal attention, i.e.
a result of plausibility-related integration failures
(Brouwer, et al., 2017; DeLong et al., 2014; Van Petten
& Luka, 2012).

To date, ERP studies that adopted the RSVP with
flankers paradigm have focused on unexpected
content words that result in semantic anomalies.
However, none of this work has examined unexpected
function words that elicit syntactic anomalies, although
results from eye-tracking studies have shown some evidence of parafoveal syntactic processing in normal
reading (Brothers & Traxler, 2016; Veldre & Andrews,
2018). Accordingly, adopting the RSVP with flankers
paradigm, the present study focused on ERPs recorded
to expected and unexpected function words, first presented in the parafovea followed by presentation to
the fovea. These function word effects were then contrasted with comparable expected and unexpected
content word processing. Given that the difference
between expected and unexpected function words
should involve greater differential syntactic processing
we aimed to determine whether such effects would be
apparent when the target function words are in the parafovea. Moreover, we were interested in examining
whether processing function words might also involve
a two-step process as reported for content words by
Payne et al. In other words, might we see a first effect
of unexpected function words when they are presented
in the parafovea followed by a second effect when these
words are presented at fixation and engage foveal
attention.
Following previous studies, we predicted a robust
parafoveal N400 and a foveal P600-like component on
unexpected content words. Furthermore, if readers
also process syntactic information of the previewed
targets, we predicted we would observe parafoveal
LAN or P600 effects on unexpected function words
when they are still in the parafovea. Lastly, if the syntactic analysis of function words is completed during parafoveal presentation (i.e. one-step processing), we
predicted that there should be little to no foveal LAN
or P600 effects on unexpected function words.
However, if as suggested by Payne et al. for content
word processing, there are also two steps involved in
function word processing when a plausibility judgment
is required, then unexpected function words might
also elicit an enhanced foveal LAN or P600.

Methods
Participants
Twenty-four right-handed, native English speakers (10
males, mean age = 22.0 years, ranging from 19 to 27)
received compensation for their participation. All participants reported normal or corrected-to-normal visual
acuity with no history of neurological impairment or

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE

language disability. All participants reported that they
had learned no other language before the age of six,
and that they were not proficient in any languages
other than English.

Stimuli & design
The critical stimuli for this study were 120 sentences
ranging from 7 to 17 words. There were three versions
of each sentence: (a) the normal version without
semantic or syntactic errors and containing a control
content word and a control function word (see sentences "a1" and "a2" below); (b) a semantic violation
version where the appropriate control content word
was replaced by an unexpected content word which
produced a semantic anomaly (see sentences "b1"
and "b2" below); and (c) a syntactic violation version
where the appropriate control function word was
replaced by an unexpected function word which produced a syntactic anomaly (see sentence "c1" and
"c2" below). None of the target words were sentence
final words. The target content and function words
were at most one word away from each other to
ensure the context around the replaced words were
similar. For example, in the sentences

91

sentences with syntactic anomalies, in 29 out of the
120 sentences, an article was replaced by a preposition
or vice versa (like c2); in 27 a preposition was replaced
by a pronoun or vice versa (like c1); in 21 a preposition
was replaced by another preposition (e.g. of-for); in
nine a conjunction was replaced by a pronoun or vice
versa (e.g. and-us); in seven a conjunction was replaced
by a preposition or vice versa (e.g. and-of); in six an
article was replaced by a pronoun or vice versa (e.g.
the-he), in five a quantifier was replaced by a preposition
or vice versa (e.g. some-in); in five a preposition was
replaced by an auxiliary verb (e.g. on-will); and the
remaining 11 between other types of function word
substitution.
We pre-tested each sentence in a group of six native
English speakers that did not participate in the ERP study
to determine if readers would be aware of the anomalies
produced by the critical words at the point these words
are presented in an RSVP format. On a 7-point scale they
rated the acceptability of each sentence through the
point of the critical words (1 not acceptable, and 7 completely acceptable). The ends of the sentences after the
critical word were not presented. For example,
*The employee needs to prepare the document for on
*The old man was asleep in the cherry

(a1) The employee needs to prepare the document for his
boss this morning.
(a2) The old man was asleep in the chair when I came
back.

The word boss/chair served as the control content words,
and his/the served as the control function words. While
boss/chair was replaced by water/cherry in the unexpected content word condition, his/the was replaced
by on/of in the unexpected function word condition.
As a result, the sentences in these two conditions were
(b1) The employee needs to prepare the document for his
water this morning.
(b2) The old man was asleep in the cherry when I came
back.
(c1) The employee needs to prepare the document for on
boss this morning.
(c2) The old man was asleep in of chair when I came back.

Though we included sentences with various types of
semantic and syntactic anomalies we did not control the
number of sentences of each subtype, which was not the
focus of the present study. For example, for sentences
with semantic anomalies, 12 out of the 120 were due
to animacy violations (but none were role-reversed sentences), while others were implausible events. For

Raters made their judgment based on whether it's
acceptable to have the word on after the context The
employee needs to prepare the document for. See Table
1 for detailed characteristics of critical words in each
condition. We also recruited a different group of
English monolinguals (n = 26) to complete a cloze task
in order to assess the predictability of the critical sentences (e.g. they saw the incomplete sentence frame
The employee needs to prepare the document for___
and completed it with whatever words or phrases
came into their minds first). Predictability is indicated
by the number of responses in which target words in
the normal version (i.e. the control condition) were
entered as the first words of their responses (e.g. his
boss and his job both counted in function words, as in
the control condition his was the target word in the sentence The employee needs to prepare the document for his
boss). No participant used the target words from the
unexpected conditions (i.e. the semantic violation and
syntactic violation versions) in any sentences. Although
function words were slightly more predictable than
content words (M = 6.45 vs. 5.30; meaning that for
each critical sentence, out of 26 responses in each
word class, 6.45 were target function words vs. 5.30
were target content words), this difference was not significant (t = 1.42, p = .16).

92

C. LI ET AL.

Table 1. Mean word frequency, length, and acceptability judgment scores (standard deviation in the parentheses) across conditions.
Content words

Unexpected
Control
Difference

Frequencya

Length

84.34 (201.34)
108.37 (216.22)
p = 0.37

5.46 (1.49)
5.67 (1.83)
p = 0.29

Acceptabilityb
1.33 (.24)
6.74 (.17)
p <.001

Function words

Unexpected
7347.07 (8504.04)
3.07 (1.16)
1.69 (.42)
Control
11752.85 (9397.60)
2.84 (1.06)
6.56 (.55)
Difference
p < .001
p = 0.13
p <.001
a
The frequency refers to the number per million based on SUBTLEX_US (Brysbaert & New, 2009).
b
The difference score between unexpected and control words for the content vs. function words were also compared (p = .16), indicating that the unexpected
content vs. function words were equally unexpected compared to their corresponding control words.

In the ERP experiment, the 120 critical sentences were
evenly distributed in three experimental lists in a Latinsquare design. In this way, each list contained 40 critical
sentences in each condition, and no sentence was
repeated within a list. Stimuli were randomised once
within each list and then presented in the same order
for each participant. Participants were randomly
assigned to a list. To elicit the higher-order and taskdependent P600-like effect that engages foveal attention, we instructed participants to judge whether a sentence makes sense after they finished reading each
sentence. Their task was to press one button on a
gamepad labelled "yes" for good sentences and
another labelled "no" for bad sentences. In order to
balance yes/no decisions 40 filler sentences without
semantic/syntactic errors were included in each list.
Each participant read 160 sentences in total.

fixation (foveal target), the upcoming word on the
right (parafoveal target), and the preceding word on
the left. For every triad, participants were instructed to
fixate on the centred word throughout the experiment
(i.e. the foveal target word). To facilitate attention to
the central foveal target this item was displayed as
white letters on a black background. The other two
flanking words were displaced as slightly dimmer grey
letters. In addition to the colour difference, we also
added two yellow vertical bars, one above and one
below the foveal target to help participants maintain
fixation on the centre of the screen. All words were presented in a fixed-width font (New Courier) with each
character occupying a 20x40 pixel matrix. Each triad
was presented for 400 ms, following which the parafoveal target became the foveal target in the following
400 ms epoch (see Figure 1 - note this method of

Procedure
All stimuli were presented on a 24-inch LCD gaming
monitor set to a refresh rate of 100 Hz and located
145 cm directly in front of the participant. The testing
began with 10 practice sentences to acclimate participants to the paradigm and experimental conditions.
A visual hemi-field RSVP with flankers paradigm was
adopted in which each sentence was presented three
words at a time, with the target word at central

Figure 1. The visual hemi-field RSVP-flanker paradigm. The
foveal target of each triad is presented centred in white.

Figure 2. Electrode montage and the 15 analysis sites used for
ANOVAs. The Ant-post factor is defined by the five sites (FP, F, C,
P, O) in each of the three Laterality columns, which are indicated
with connecting lines. The four additional electrodes were A1
(the reference site over the left mastoid bone), A2 (the other
reference cite to monitor for differential mastoid activity); LE
(the eye electrode to monitor for blinks), and HE (the eye electrode to monitor for horizontal eye movements).

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE

display makes the sentence seem to "slide" one word at
a time from right to left). Each sentence presentation
started with a fixation mark ("+") at the centre of the
screen (i.e. where the foveal target would be presented),
and ended with a purple question mark ("?") at the
centre that indicating it was time to make the acceptability judgment. Participants were asked to maintain
fixation on the central stimulus and to minimise blinking
during sentence presentation, but were encouraged to
make movements/blinks during the presentation of
the fixation and question mark, which did not disappear
until participants pressed a continue button at which
point the fixation mark of the next trial was displayed.
There were three longer rest breaks every 40 sentences.

EEG recording
Participants were seated in a comfortable chair in a
sound attenuated darkened room. An electro-cap
fitted with tin electrodes was used to record continuous
EEG from scalp 29 sites (See Figure 2). Four additional
electrodes were used: one over the left mastoid bone
that served as the reference site for all scalp electrodes;
one over the right mastoid that was used to monitor for
differential mastoid activity; one below the left eye
which together with the FP1 electrode was used to
monitor for vertical eye movement (i.e. blinks), and
one at the outer canthus of the right eye to monitor
for horizontal eye movements. Impedances were kept
below 2.5 k for all electrodes. EEG signals were
amplified using Neuroscan Synamp RT amplifiers with
a bandpass of DC to 100 Hz. The signals were digitally
sampled at 500 Hz throughout the experiment.

EEG analysis
Separate ERPs from four types of critical words (control
content vs. unexpected content, control function vs.
unexpected function) at two-sentence positions (foveal
target, parafoveal target) were calculated time-locked
to the onset of the target triad. Averaging began
100 ms prior to stimulus onset and continued 1,000 ms
thereafter. The resulting data were baselined to the
mean voltage in a period from -100 to 0 ms pre-target
onset for parafoveal and foveal targets, respectively.
Trials with muscle artefact or eye movements (less
than 5% of trials in total) were excluded. We were
especially careful to monitor for and reject trials with
any evidence of horizontal eye movements.
Repeated measures analyses of variance (ANOVAs)
were used to analyze the ERP data. We analyzed the critical content and function words at each sentence position (foveal vs. parafoveal) separately. For both

93

content and function words, for each position, the analysis included within participant factors of Word Type
(control vs. unexpected), and two electrode position
factors, Laterality (left vs. midline vs. right) and Antpost (anterior-posterior, FP vs. F vs. C vs. P vs. O - see
Figure 2 for a diagram of the sites used). For all statistical
analyses Geisser-Greenhouse correction was used for all
repeated measures factors with greater than 1 degree of
freedom in the numerator (Geisser & Greenhouse,1959).

Results
Behavioural results
Participants judged an average of 88.9% of the sentences correctly (SD = 3.0%). The accuracy rates in conditions with a no response (unexpected function
words: M = 91.5%, SD = 9.1%; unexpected content
words: M = 93.2%, SD = 5.1%) were higher than sentences with a yes response (control: M = 85.4%, SD =
7.3%; fillers: 85.3%, SD = 6.1%; ps < .05). This was probably due to a high threshold for yes responses. The >
85% accuracy rate in all conditions confirmed attentive
reading.

Visual inspection of ERPs
The parafoveal results are plotted in Figures 3 and 4 and
are the grand mean ERP waveforms for content and
function words time-locked to the onset of the parafoveal targets. In these figures, the epoch starts with two
broadly distributed components peaking at around
100 ms (N1) and 250 ms (P2). Neither of these components appears to be influenced by the Word Type variable. Starting at around 300 ms and continuing through
700 ms there was a larger negative-going component
that appears to be larger for unexpected words compared to expected words.
The foveal results are shown in Figures 5 and 6 and
are the grand mean ERPs for content and function
words time-locked to the onset of words in the foveal
target position. Just as in the parafoveal plots (Figures
3 and 4) the ERPs in these figures start with broadly distributed N1 and P2 components. Following these, for
content words, the first visible component that
appears to differ between Word Types was a negativegoing deflection between 0 and 150 ms after stimulus
onset that was followed by a larger positive-going
deflection starting from 300 ms post-stimulus onset.
For function words, the first and only visible difference
for unexpected words compared to expected words
was a positive-going deflection starting from 650 ms
after stimulus onset. Figure 7A shows voltage maps at

94

C. LI ET AL.

Figure 3. ERPs time locked to parafoveal target onset from the 15 sites that were included in analyses, comparing unexpected vs.
control content targets. The black line is from the control content targets, while the red line is from the unexpected content
targets. We also plotted the ERPs from the channels that monitor horizontal eye movements (HE). While 0 ms refers to the parafoveal
target onset, the targets moved to the foveal position at 400 ms.

the 350-550 ms and 650-950 ms time windows for parafoveal targets, while Figure 7B shows voltage maps at
the same time windows for foveal targets.

Type effect was only significant at the left hemisphere
column (F (1, 23) = 5.25, p = .031) and the midline (F (1,
23) = 5.11, p = .033), but not at the right hemisphere
column (F (1, 23) = 1.35, p = .26).

Epoch analysis of ERPs

Parafoveal targets 650-950 ms
In this epoch, for both content and function words, Word
Type did not show a significant main effect or interaction
with the two electrode position factors (ps > .37).

Parafoveal targets 350-550 ms
For content words, an omnibus ANOVA on the mean
amplitude values in this epoch revealed significant
main effects of Word Type (F (1, 23) = 9.14, p = .006), indicating that unexpected content words elicited more
negative-going ERPs than control words. There was
also a significant interaction between Word Type and
Laterality (F (2,46) = 4.22, p = .021) with the Word Type
effect size at the midline (F (1, 23) = 11.62, p = .002)
and the right column (F (1, 23) = 7.96, p = .010) being
stronger than that at the left column (F (1, 23) = 7.09,
p = .014). There was also a marginally significant Word
Type Ant-post interaction (F (4, 92) = 3.76, p = .051),
further analyses of which showed that the Word Type
effect was significant at F sites (F (1, 23) = 5.0, p = .035),
C sites (F (1, 23) = 18.95, p < .001), P sites (F (1, 23) =
12.2, p < .001) and O sites (F (1, 23) = 9.31, p = .006), but
not at FP sites (F (1, 23) <1, p = .83).
For function words, the omnibus ANOVA showed a
significant Word Type Laterality interaction (F (2, 46) =
6.11, p = .011). Further analyses showed that the Word

Foveal targets 350-550 ms
Analyses of this epoch showed that unexpected content
words produced more positive-going ERPs than control
words (Word Type main effect: F (1, 23) = 7.97, p = .010).
In addition, Word Type showed a significant interaction
with both Laterality (F (2, 46) = 3.72, p = .047) and Antpost (F (4, 92) = 8.11, p = .001). Follow-up analyses
showed that the positivity was significant in all three
columns (left: F (1, 23) = 5.30, p = .030; midline: F (1,
23) = 7.85, p = .010; and right: F (1, 23) = 10.08, p
= .004), although numerically it was largest over the
right hemisphere (M = 0.92, 1.21, and 1.31 on the left,
midline, and right, respectively). In addition, the positivity was significant at C sites (F (1, 23) = 7.84, p = .010), P
sites (F (1, 23) = 13.06, p = .001), and O sites (F (1, 23) =
16.36; p < .001), but was not significant at FP and F
sites (ps > .10).

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE

95

Figure 4. ERPs time locked to parafoveal target onset from the 15 sites that were included in analyses, comparing unexpected vs.
control function targets. The black line is from the control function targets, while the red line is from the unexpected function
targets. We also plotted the ERPs from the channels that monitor horizontal eye movements (HE). While 0 ms refers to the parafoveal
target onset, the targets moved to the foveal position at 400 ms.

Figure 5. ERPs time locked to foveal target onset from the 15 sites that were included in analyses, comparing unexpected vs. control
content targets. The black line is from the control content targets, while the red line is from the unexpected content targets. We also
plotted the ERPs from the channels that monitor horizontal eye movements (HE). While 0 ms refers to the foveal target onset, the
targets moved to the left position (i.e. being the preceding word) at 400 ms.

96

C. LI ET AL.

Figure 6. ERPs time locked to foveal target onset from the 15 sites that were included in analyses, comparing unexpected vs. control
function targets. The black line is from the control function targets, while the red line is from the unexpected function targets. We also
plotted the ERPs from the channels that monitor horizontal eye movements (HE). While 0 ms refers to the foveal target onset, the
targets moved to the left position (i.e. being the preceding word) at 400 ms.

For function words, the omnibus ANOVA showed a
significant interaction between Word Type and Laterality
(F (2, 46) = 7.36, p = .007). Follow-up analyses suggested
that unexpected function words had a trend to elicit
more positive-going deflections at the left column and
more negative-going deflections at the right column
than control words, but none of the three lines (i.e.
left, midline, and right) showed a significant Word
Type effect (ps > .10).

= 5.12, p = .033), marginally significant at the midline (F
(1, 23) = 3.57, p = .071), and was not significant at the
right column (F < 1). There was also a significant interaction between Word Type and Ant-post (F (4, 92) =
14.32, p = < .001). Follow-up analyses showed that the
difference between unexpected and control function
words was significant at P sites (F (1, 23) = 19.32, p
< .001) and O sites (F (1, 23) = 11.26, p = .003), but was
not significant FP, F, and C sites (ps > .12).

Foveal targets 650-950 ms
For content words, the omnibus ANOVA revealed significant main effects of Word Type (F (1, 23) = 9.14, p < .001),
indicating that unexpected content words elicited more
positive-going ERPs than control words. There was also a
significant interaction between Word Type and Ant-post
(F (2, 46) = 4.22, p = .021). Follow-up analyses showed
that the difference between unexpected vs. control
words was significant at C sites (F (1, 23) = 18.84, p
< .001), P cites (F (1, 23) = 27.77, p < .001), and O sites
(F (1, 23) = 29.71, p < .001), marginally significant at F
sites (F (1, 23) = 4.08, p = .055), but was not significant
at FP sites (F < 1).
For function words, although the main effect of Word
Type was not significant (F (1, 23) = 2.12, p = .16), there
was a significant interaction between Word Type and
Laterality (F (2, 46) = 7.88, p = .007). The Word Type
effect was only significant at the left column (F (1, 23)

Word class difference wave analyses
We further calculated the difference between waves of
unexpected and control words in each critical time
window and then analyzed this difference as a function
of Word Class (content vs. function)1, Laterality (left vs.
midline vs. right) and Ant-post (FP vs. F vs. C vs. P vs.
O) as three independent variables. These analyses
showed that the distribution of the above word type
effects was significantly different between content and
function words as follows. The analyses of parafoveal
target words between 350 and 550 ms showed a significant interaction between Word Class and Laterality (F (2,
46) = 5.68, p = .012). Combining the findings in separate
analyses for content and function words, the negativity
was right lateralised for unexpected content words but
left lateralised for unexpected function words. See
Figure 7A for the spatial distribution that illustrates
these interactions.

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE

97

Figure 7. Voltage maps calculated from the mean difference (in microvolts) between unexpected words and control words at 29 scalp
sites at the 350-550 ms (left column) and 650-950 ms (right column) time windows. Panel A shows the maps for parafoveal targets,
while Panel B shows the maps for foveal targets.

The analyses of foveal targets between 350 and 550 ms
showed a significant interaction between Word Class and
Laterality (F (2, 46) = 12.28, p < .001), a marginally significant interaction Word Class and Ant-post (F (4, 92) =
3.36, p = .062), and a significant three-way interaction (F

(8, 184) = 2.61, p = .032). As shown above, while unexpected content words elicited a right lateralised positivity
at posterior sites, unexpected function words did not elicit
any significant effects. See Figure 7B for the spatial distribution that illustrates these interactions.

98

C. LI ET AL.

The analyses of foveal targets between 650 and
950 ms showed a significant interaction between Word
Class and Laterality (F (2, 46) = 7.31, p = .006) and a significant three-way interaction (F (8, 184) = 3.56, p
= .007). While unexpected words in both classes
showed a positivity in this time window, the effect elicited by unexpected function words was more left lateralised and posteriorly distributed. See Figure 7B for the
spatial distribution that illustrates these interactions.

Discussion
In the present study, we used the RSVP with flankers
paradigm combined with ERP recording to compare
parafoveal-foveal content versus function word processing during sentence comprehension. The first
notable finding was that we replicated previous
studies, whereby an unexpected semantically anomalous content word elicited a widely distributed parafoveal N400 (e.g. Barber et al., 2010, 2013; Li et al., 2015;
Payne & Federmeier, 2017; Payne et al., 2019; Stites
et al., 2017). In addition, a broadly distributed positivity
but no N400 was shown when the unexpected content
word was foveated. A novel finding of the current
study was that unexpected function words in the parafovea also elicited a negativity around 400 ms. At first
blush, this finding would seem to suggest that unexpected function words, like content words, produce
an N400 effect. However, careful examination of the
negativity produced by unexpected function words
suggests this effect was more left lateralised compared
to the comparable effect seen for content words.
Therefore, we cautiously suggest this effect might
better be classified as a parafoveal LAN. Interestingly,
function words did not elicit a parafoveal P600 effect
but did show a clear P600 when they were foveated.
In summary, for both content and function words,
different ERP components were shown when the
targets were presented in the parafovea versus in the
fovea. Consistent with the results of Payne et al.
(2019), these results indicate there are two stages
that differently engages attention in sentence comprehension, regardless of the part of speech of target
words.

Content words
As mentioned above, the parafoveal N400 elicited by
unexpected content words is consistent with previous
studies with similar manipulations. Because these
words only moved to the fovea after 400 ms, this
result strongly suggests that the effect cannot be
due to foveal processing. One potential caveat is

that participants might have on some trials made
rightward saccades during the presentation of the
critical word in the parafovea, thus allowing foveal
processing of the critical items. To guard against
this possibility, we carefully monitored horizontal
eye movements and rejected all trials containing
such movements.
When target words were foveated, unexpected
content words no longer elicited an N400 effect, consistent with previous findings that a parafoveal N400 mitigated or even eliminated the following foveal N400
(Stites et al., 2017). Instead, a broadly distributed positivity was seen starting around 300 ms after targets were
foveated. It seems likely that this positivity reflects the
same process that the late positivity reported by Payne
et al. (2019), namely, a failure of sentence level integration for foveated unexpected content words. An
alternative possibility is that the foveal content word
effect is a member of the semantic P600. Semantic
P600s had been observed in sentences with semantic
anomalies with a plausible non-surface interpretation,
typically in role-reversed sentences (e.g. The mouse is
chasing the cat) or sentences with animacy violation
(e.g. The hearty meal was devouring) in which the error
could be attributed to syntactic properties like word
order or the characteristics of the agent/patient of a
verb (e.g. Chow & Phillips, 2013; Herten, Kolk, &
Chwilla, 2005; Kim & Osterhout, 2005; Kuperberg,
2007). Although none of our sentences involved role
reversals and only 13 out of 120 sentences with semantic
anomalies involved animacy violation, other factors may
also elicit semantic P600s, such as the severity of the
conflict between expected words and the presented
words. For example, Van De Meerendonk et al. (2010)
found that deeply implausible sentences (e.g. The eye
consisting of among other things a pupil, iris, sticker
...) elicited a larger P600 than mildly implausible sentences (e.g. The eye consisting of among other things
a pupil, iris, eyebrow ... .). We suggested that the positivities shown in the present study were less likely to be
semantic P600 though, considering that the semantic
P600 has been observed in both active and passive comprehension tasks in previous research, while our effects,
according to Payne et al. (2019), were likely only present
in tasks that required participants to make an overt judgment (see Leckey & Federmeier, 2020 for review). Nevertheless, either a result of plausibility-relevant integration
failures or a semantic P600, our suggestion is that the
component elicited by unexpected content words
engages foveal attention. Both interpretations suggest
difficulty in sentence-level re-analysis.
One interesting difference between the current foveal
P600-like effects and the positivities reported by Payne

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE

et al. (2019) is that the current effects seem to have a
somewhat earlier time course. One possible explanation
of this difference might be that Payne et al. (2019) used
the same baseline for parafoveal and foveal targets,
while in the present study we reset the baseline for
foveal targets. However, our foveal P600-like effects
were already robust in the foveal N400 time window.
Although additional analyses showed that the effects
were no longer significant if we used the baseline for
parafoveal targets (ps > .13), unexpected content
words still elicited numerically more positive waves in
this time window. In contrast, previous studies using
the baseline for parafoveal targets showed negativities
in the foveal N400 time window (Payne et al., 2019;
Stites et al., 2017). The opposite direction suggested
that different baseline at least was not the only reason.
Importantly, this difference does not affect our most
critical comparison between content versus function
words, given the baselines of the two-word classes
were the same. Another factor that may contribute to
this different P600 time course might be the experimental procedure. In the present study, each trial was presented for 400 ms with no blank screen between
words. In Payne et al.'s (2019) study each word was presented for 100 ms but was followed by a 350 ms blank
screen. It is possible that the 50 ms shorter SOA or the
300 ms longer presentation duration of each parafoveal
target in our study contributed to the earlier target P600
onset. Although more research is needed to confirm this
speculation, neither of the above possibilities affected
our critical claims. That is, our results showed evidence
that initial semantic processing occurs early in parafovea, while the later stage semantic processing at the
higher-order sentence level engages foveal attention,
overall consistent with previous findings.

Function words
The novel manipulation in the present study was on
function words. Unexpected function words elicited
negativity between 350 and 550 ms when presented
in the parafovea. However, the distribution of this
effect was greater over midline and left-hemisphere
sites, whereas the comparable content word N400
effect was larger over the midline and right hemisphere
sites. Moreover, while the parafoveal N400 effect for
content words had a focus at central to posterior electrodes, the effect for function words showed a flatter
distribution along the anterior-posterior axis, an
absence of Word Type Ant-post interaction. Therefore,
the negativity was relatively more anterior on function
than content words. Given the difference in spatial distribution, the parafoveal negativity elicited by

99

unexpected function words seems more likely to be
related to previous reports of LAN effects for syntactic
violations. Although the LAN is typically distributed
more anteriorly while our effect shows a broad distribution across anterior and posterior sites, this could
be because the LAN and N400 are not categorically distinct ERP components; instead, the distribution reflects
a continuum about agreement errors on semantic and
syntactic processing (Molinaro, et al., 2015; also see
Barber & Carreiras, 2005; Tanner & Van Hell, 2014).
Namely, the more semantic information processed,
the more N400-like are the effects; the more syntactic
information processed, the more LAN-like are the
effects. Therefore, this different N400 versus relatively
more LAN-like distribution elicited by content versus
function words did indicate more semantic process
versus relatively more syntactic processing in parafovea, respectively. In addition, the absence of foveal
LAN further suggested that initial syntactic processing
of function words was completed before targets are
foveated, similar to the initial semantic processing of
content words.
Interestingly we did not observe any P600-like activity
when function words were in peripheral vision. The presence of parafoveal LAN and absence of parafoveal P600
supported the claim that the LAN and the P600 are two
functionally dissociable components (Mancini, et al.,
2011). While the LAN reflects earlier and more automatic
syntactic processing, the P600 seems more likely to
reflect a higher-order/sentence level structural repair
or reanalysis process that occurs at a later stage (Friederici, 2002). This difference was also consistent with previous research that adopted the co-registration
approach of eye movements and fixation-related-potentials (FRPs), which showed that regressions were strongly
associated with the P600 effect in natural reading (i.e.
when the whole sentence was available to readers in
each trial; Metzner, et al., 2017; also see Degno & Liversedge, 2020 for a review of this co-registration approach).
According to Metzner et al. (2017), regressions reflect
readers' attempt to find alternative interpretations in
response to words that do not match built-up expectations, thus eliciting P600 effects which reflect sentence
level reanalysis. In addition, P600 effects were triggered
by both semantic and syntactic anomalies in Metzner
et al. (2017), although in that study both types of
anomalies were elicited by unexpected content words.
This result was consistent with the present study, that
both unexpected content and function words in fovea
elicited P600 effects, supporting the claim that P600
might not be specific to syntactic processing, but
reflect a general process of reanalysis. The present
study further suggested that the reanalysis process

100

C. LI ET AL.

might involve direct/foveal attention to the words that
elicit anomalies.
The foveal P600 elicited by function words appeared
later, was more left lateralised, and more posteriorly distributed than the foveal P600-like effects elicited by
content words. These differences seemed consistent
with early findings in Kutas and Hillyard (1983), which
directly compared content versus function words using
the word-by-word RSVP paradigm - in sentence comprehension, ERPs elicited by content words were
overall more positive than those elicited by function
words from 200 to 700 ms over most scalp sites. The
word class effects on foveal targets probably reflect
general different mechanisms of content versus function
words processing at the sentence level, although the
exact mechanism(s) is not clear. It is possible that the
foveal P600 elicited by unexpected content words was
more about plausibility-relevant integration failures,
while the foveal P600 elicited by unexpected function
words was more relevant to syntactic re-analysis at the
sentence level. While future research is needed to
examine the exact mechanism(s), one factor that is unlikely to be the cause of the different distribution and
time course in the present study are differences in
expectancy, as our rating results showed that unexpected content and function words were less acceptable
than their controls to the similar extent before the
context after the critical words are presented. One conclusion that does seem warranted is that the processes
involved in both P600-like effects likely include foveal
attention. In other tasks such as passive reading or
memory tasks, unexpected content words have not
been shown to elicit the foveal positive component,
and while no RSVP passive reading studies have
looked at function word anomalies it seems reasonable
that the function word P600 effect seen here also
resulted in part from the attentional demands of the
task. Future research is needed to verify this speculation.

Limitations and future research
Like most studies of complex cognitive/linguistic questions, the present study had several limitations. First,
while the RSVP with flankers paradigm is a clear
improvement over the word-by-word RSVP task in
terms of approximating the stimulus conditions
encountered in natural reading, it is still possible that
participants in this task use a less than natural
reading strategy that impacted the pattern of ERP
anomaly effects reported. One possibility is that
despite instructions to fixate the highlighted word at
fixation, participants nevertheless consistently biased
their attention to the right of the central word allowing

the word to the right to receive more in-depth processing than occurs in natural reading. This might make
the reported parafoveal effects reported here and in
previous RSVP with flankers studies more akin to
typical foveal effects in RSVP studies. This might
happen because of a longish SOA (400 ms in our
study) which results in a slightly slower than typical
reading rate thus encouraging rightward shifts of
attention. However, because we carefully monitored
participants' horizontal eye movements to guard
against the possibility of saccades to and from the
rightward parafoveal words, one thing that we can be
sure of is that any such attentional bias occurred in
the absence of accompanying eye movements. If participants were consistently covertly attending to the
word to the right of fixation, they were doing so
without moving their eyes. Importantly, even if participants in the RSVP with flankers task consistently covertly attend to the parafoveal word, the ERP results
obtained clearly demonstrate that it is possible for
words in the parafovea to influence both semantic
and syntactic processing, a process followed by a
second step engages foveal attention.
Second, the results of the present study might be
dependent on requirements to make plausibility judgments to each sentence. As suggested in Payne et al.
(2019), the foveal P600 effect elicited by semantic
anomalies was only present in their experiment requiring plausibility judgments but was not present in
passive comprehension. Therefore, some effects
reported here for function words might also be selectively present in the plausibility judgment task.
Third, although we did not directly compare content
versus function words, these two-word classes typically
appear alternately in a sentence. As a result, parafoveal
content words might have, on average, been closer to
foveal vision than parafoveal function words which
could account for some of the differences between
word classes we are reporting.
Fourth, given the 400 ms presentation duration of
each triad, what we are reporting as a foveal P600
effects might alternatively be a somewhat delayed parafoveal P600 (see Risse & Kliegl, 2012 for the similar argument in eye-tracking studies).
Lastly, in the present study, we showed P600-like
effects in both semantically and syntactically anomalous
sentences. While we argued that both effects reflect sentence-level integration and re-analysis difficulties, there
were differences in terms of time course and scalp distribution suggesting that semantics and syntax may affect
the family of late positivities differently.
To address these limitations, future research with
more diverse paradigms (e.g. FRPs, passive

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE

comprehension), other languages (e.g. Chinese in which
word length difference is less salient across content
versus function words, so that visual angle of flanker
words can be better controlled), and more factors controlled (e.g. orthographic similarity between target
words and unexpected words, sub-word class within
content and function words such as the comparison
between nouns vs. verbs, preposition vs. conjunctions)
are needed to provide a more comprehensive picture.
Future research should also include more detailed
manipulations of semantic and syntactic variables such
as role-reversed sentences, morphosyntactic violations
and agreement violations to elicit semantic P600
versus syntactic P600 via different components to shed
light on the meaning of late positivities in sentence comprehension. Despite the above limitations and the clear
need for additional studies, we would argue that our
results and those of previous RSVP with flankers
studies (e.g. Payne & Federmeier, 2017; Payne et al.,
2019; Stites et al., 2017) provide important additional
information beyond that gleaned from the traditional
RSVP paradigm about the neural mechanisms involved
in semantic and syntactic processing during sentence
comprehension.

Conclusion
In summary, the present study suggested that in sentence comprehension content versus function words
elicit more semantic versus syntactic processing,
respectively. More importantly, similar to content
words, the processing of function words also appears
to include two stages that rely on attention to
different extents. In sentence comprehension in
natural settings, readers are able to first perform an
initial semantic and syntactic assessment of the upcoming word when it is presented in the parafovea. At this
stage, semantic and syntactic processing is fast,
perhaps automatic, and does not have to rely on
direct attention. In contrast, at the second stage
readers seem to perform a more in-depth attentional
mediated assessment. Both semantic and syntactic processing at this stage seems to be about sentence-level
integration or re-analysis, which engages foveal
attention.

Note
1. Note that using difference waves computed in this
manner removes any word category specific differences
prior to analysis of differences in the anomaly effects (i.e.
word type effects) as a function of word class.

101

Acknowledgement
This research was supported by grants from the Eunice
Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and
Human Development (HD099325, HD25889). Any opinions,
findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in
this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of NIH.

Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).

Funding
This work was supported by Eunice Kennedy Shriver National
Institute of Child Health and Human Development: [Grant
Number 099325, 25889].

References
Altarriba, J., Kambe, G., Pollatsek, A., & Rayner, K. (2001).
Semantic codes are not used in integrating information
across eye fixations in reading: Evidence from fluent
spanish-English bilinguals. Perception & Psychophysics, 63
(5), 875-890. https://doi.org/10.3758/BF03194444
Barber, H, & Carreiras, M. (2005). Grammatical gender and
number agreement in Spanish: An ERP comparison.
Journal of cognitive neuroscience, 17(1), 137-153.
Barber, H. A., Donamayor, N., Kutas, M., & Munte, T. (2010).
Parafoveal N400 effect during sentence reading.
Neuroscience Letters, 479(2), 152-156. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.neulet.2010.05.053
Barber, H. A., van der Meij, M., & Kutas, M. (2013). An electrophysiological analysis of contextual and temporal constraints on parafoveal word processing. Psychophysiology,
50(1), 48-59. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-8986.2012.
01489.x
Berndt, R S, & Caramazza, A. (1980). A redefinition of the syndrome of Broca's aphasia: Implications for a neuropsychological model of language. Applied psycholinguistics, 1(3), 225-
278.
Biassou, N, Obler, L K, Nespoulous, J L, Dordain, M, & Harris, K S.
(1997). Dual processing of open-and closed-class words.
Brain and Language, 57(3), 360-373.
Bradley, D. C., & Garrett, M. F. (1983). Hemisphere differences in
the recognition of closed and open class words.
Neuropsychologia, 21(2), 155-159. https://doi.org/10.1016/
0028-3932(83)90082-9
Briihl, D., & Inhoff, A. W. (1995). Integrating information across
fixations during reading: The use of orthographic bodies
and of exterior letters. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 21(1), 55-67. https://doi.
org/10.1037/0278-7393.21.1.55
Brothers, T., & Traxler, M. J. (2016). Anticipating syntax during
reading: Evidence from the boundary change paradigm.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 42(12), 1894-1906. https://doi.org/10.1037/
xlm0000257

102

C. LI ET AL.

Brouwer, H, Crocker, M W, Venhuizen, N J, & Hoeks, J C. (2017).
A neurocomputational model of the N400 and the P600 in
language processing. Cognitive science, 41, 1318-1352.
Brown, C. M., Hagoort, P., & Keurs, M. T. (1999).
Electrophysiological signatures of visual lexical processing:
Open-and closed-class words. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 11(3), 261-281. https://doi.org/10.1162/
089892999563382
Brunelliere, A., Hoen, M., & Dominey, P. F. (2005). ERP correlates
of lexical analysis: N280 reflects processing complexity
rather than category or frequency effects. Neuroreport, 16
(13),
1435-1438.
https://doi.org/10.1097/01.wnr.
0000177008.98860.69
Brysbaert, Marc, & New, Boris. (2009). Moving beyond Kuera
and Francis: A critical evaluation of current word frequency
norms and the introduction of a new and improved word
frequency measure for American English. Behavior
Research Methods, 41(4), 977-990. http://dx.doi.org/10.
3758/BRM.41.4.977
Caramazza, A, & Zurif, E B. (1976). Dissociation of algorithmic
and heuristic processes in language comprehension:
Evidence from aphasia. Brain and language, 3(4), 572-582.
Chow, W. Y., & Phillips, C. (2013). No semantic illusions in the
"semantic P600" phenomenon: ERP evidence from mandarin
Chinese. Brain Research, 1506, 76-93. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.brainres.2013.02.016
Coulson, S., King, J. W., & Kutas, M. (1998). Expect the unexpected: Event-related brain response to morphosyntactic
violations. Language and Cognitive Processes, 13(1), 21-58.
https://doi.org/10.1080/016909698386582
Degno, F, & Liversedge, S P. (2020). Eye movements and fixationrelated potentials in reading: a review, 4.
DeLong, K. A., Quante, L., & Kutas, M. (2014). Predictability,
plausibility, and two late ERP positivities during written sentence comprehension. Neuropsychologia, 61, 150-162.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2014.06.016
Dimigen, O, Kliegl, R, & Sommer, W. (2012). Trans-saccadic parafoveal preview benefits in fluent reading: A study with
fixation-related brain potentials. Neuroimage, 62(1), 381-
393.
Federmeier, K. D., Wlotko, E. W., De Ochoa-Dewald, E., & Kutas,
M. (2007). Multiple effects of sentential constraint on word
processing. Brain Research, 1146, 75-84. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.brainres.2006.06.101
Friederici, A. D. (1985). Levels of processing and vocabulary
types: Evidence from on-line comprehension in normals
and agrammatics. Cognition, 19(2), 133-166. https://doi.
org/10.1016/0010-0277(85)90016-2
Friederici, A D. (2002). Towards a neural basis of auditory
sentence processing. Trends in cognitive sciences, 6(2),
78-84.
Friederici, A D, & Kilborn, K. (1989). Temporal constraints on
language processing: Syntactic priming in Broca's aphasia.
Journal of cognitive neuroscience, 1(3), 262-272.
Friederici, A. D., Opitz, B., & Von Cramon, D. Y. (2000).
Segregating semantic and syntactic aspects of processing
in the human brain: An fMRI investigation of different
word types. Cerebral Cortex, 10(7), 698-705. https://doi.
org/10.1093/cercor/10.7.698
Friederici, A. D., Pfeifer, E., & Hahne, A. (1993). Event-related
brain potentials during natural speech processing: Effects
of semantic, morphological and syntactic violations.

Cognitive Brain Research, 1(3), 183-192. https://doi.org/10.
1016/0926-6410(93)90026-2
Friederici, A D, Weissenborn, J, & Kail, M. (1991). Pronoun comprehension in aphasia: A comparison of three languages.
Brain and language, 41(2), 289-310.
Gordon, P. C., Plummer, P., & Choi, W. (2013). See before you
jump: Full recognition of parafoveal words precedes skips
during reading. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 39(2), 633-641. https://
doi.org/10.1037/a0028881
Grainger, J., Midgley, K. J., & Holcomb, P. J. (2016). Trans-saccadic repetition priming: ERPs reveal on-line integration of
information across words. Neuropsychologia, 80, 201-211.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2015.11.025
Hagoort, P., Brown, C., & Groothusen, J. (1993). The syntactic
positive shift (SPS) as an ERP measure of syntactic processing. Language and Cognitive Processes, 8(4), 439-483.
https://doi.org/10.1080/01690969308407585
Inhoff, A. W. (1989). Lexical access during eye fixations in
reading: Are word access codes used to integrate lexical
information across interword fixations? Journal of Memory
and Language, 28(4), 444-461. https://doi.org/10.1016/
0749-596X(89)90021-1
Inhoff, A. W. (1989). Parafoveal processing of words and
saccade computation during eye fixations in reading.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 15(3), 544-555. https://doi.org/10.1037/00961523.15.3.544
Inhoff, A. W. (1990). Integrating information across eye
fixations in reading: The role of letter and word units. Acta
Psychologica, 73(3), 281-297. https://doi.org/10.1016/00016918(90)90027-D
Inhoff, A. W., & Tousman, S. (1990). Lexical integration across
saccades in reading. Psychological Research, 52(4), 330-337.
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00868065
Kaan, E, Harris, A, Gibson, E, & Holcomb, P. (2000). The P600 as
an index of syntactic integration difficulty. Language and
cognitive processes, 15(2), 159-201.
Keurs, T., Brown, M., Hagoort, C. M., & Stegeman, P., & F, D.
(1999). Electrophysiological manifestations of open-and
closed-class words in patients with broca's aphasia with
agrammatic comprehension: An event-related brain potential study. Brain, 122(5), 839-854. https://doi.org/10.1093/
brain/122.5.839
Kim, A., & Osterhout, L. (2005). The independence of combinatory semantic processing: Evidence from event-related
potentials. Journal of Memory and Language, 52(2), 205-
225. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2004.10.002
Kim, A, & Sikos, L. (2011). Conflict and surrender during sentence processing: An ERP study of syntax-semantics interaction. Brain and Language, 118(1-2), 15-22.
Kuperberg, G R. (2007). Neural mechanisms of language comprehension: Challenges to syntax. Brain research, 1146, 23-
49.
Kutas, M., & Hillyard, S. A. (1980). Event-related brain potentials
to semantically inappropriate and surprisingly large words.
Biological Psychology, 11(2), 99-116. https://doi.org/10.
1016/0301-0511(80)90046-0
Kutas, M., & Hillyard, S. A. (1983). Event-related brain potentials
to grammatical errors and semantic anomalies. Memory &
Cognition,
11(5),
539-550.
https://doi.org/10.3758/
BF03196991

LANGUAGE, COGNITION AND NEUROSCIENCE

Kutas, M., & Hillyard, S. A. (1984). Brain potentials during
reading reflect word expectancy and semantic association.
Nature, 307(5947), 161-163. https://doi.org/10.1038/
307161a0
Leckey, M., & Federmeier, K. D. (2020). The P3b and P600 (s):
positive contributions to language comprehension.
Psychophysiology, 57(7), e13351. https://doi.org/10.1111/
psyp.13351
Li, N., Niefind, F., Wang, S., Sommer, W., & Dimigen, O. (2015).
Parafoveal processing in reading Chinese sentences:
Evidence
from
event-related
brain
potentials.
Psychophysiology, 52(10), 1361-1374. https://doi.org/10.
1111/psyp.12502
Mancini, S, Molinaro, N, Rizzi, L, & Carreiras, M. (2011). A person
is not a number: Discourse involvement in subject-verb
agreement computation. Brain research, 1410, 64-76.
Meade, G., Declerck, M., Holcomb, P. J., & Grainger, J. (2021).
Parallel semantic processing in the flankers task: Evidence
from the N400. Brain and Language, 219, 104965. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2021.104965
Metzner, P, Von Der Malsburg, T, Vasishth, S, & Rosler, F. (2017).
The importance of reading naturally: Evidence from combined recordings of eye movements and electric brain
potentials. Cognitive Science, 41, 1232-1263.
Mirault, J., Yeaton, J., Broqua, F., Dufau, S., Holcomb, P. J., &
Grainger, J. (2020). Parafoveal-on-foveal repetition effects
in sentence reading: A co-registered eye-tracking and electroencephalogram study. Psychophysiology, 57(8), e13553.
https://doi.org/10.1111/psyp.13553
Molinaro, N, Barber, H A, Caffarra, S, & Carreiras, M. (2015). On
the left anterior negativity (LAN): The case of morphosyntactic agreement. Cortex, 66, 156-159.
Molinaro, N, Barber, H A, & Carreiras, M. (2011). Grammatical
agreement processing in reading: ERP findings and future
directions. cortex, 47(8), 908-930.
Munte, T. F., Wieringa, B. M., Weyerts, H., Szentkuti, A., Matzke,
M., & Johannes, S. (2001). Differences in brain potentials to
open and closed class words: Class and frequency effects.
Neuropsychologia, 39(1), 91-102. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0028-3932(00)00095-6
Neville, H. J., Mills, D. L., & Lawson, D. S. (1992). Fractionating
language: Different neural subsystems with different sensitive periods. Cerebral Cortex, 2(3), 244-258. https://doi.org/
10.1093/cercor/2.3.244
Nobre, A. C., & McCarthy, G. (1994). Language-related ERPs:
Scalp distributions and modulation by word type and
semantic priming. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 6(3),
233-255. https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn.1994.6.3.233
Nobre, A. C., Price, C. J., Turner, R., & Friston, K. (1997). Selective
processing of nouns and function words in the human brain.
Neuroimage, 5(4), 53.
O'rourke, P L, & Van Petten, C. (2011). Morphological agreement at a distance: Dissociation between early and late
components of the event-related brain potential. Brain
research, 1392, 62-79.
Osterhout, L., Bersick, M., & McKinnon, R. (1997). Brain potentials elicited by words: Word length and frequency predict
the latency of an early negativity. Biological Psychology, 46
(2), 143-168. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0301-0511(97)052502
Osterhout, L., & Holcomb, P. J. (1992). Event-related brain
potentials elicited by syntactic anomaly. Journal of Memory

103

and Language, 31(6), 785-806. https://doi.org/10.1016/
0749-596X(92)90039-Z
Osterhout, L., Holcomb, P. J., & Swinney, D. A. (1994). Brain
potentials elicited by garden-path sentences: Evidence of
the application of verb information during parsing. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 20(4), 786-803. https://doi.org/10.1037/02787393.20.4.786
Payne, B. R., & Federmeier, K. D. (2017). Pace yourself:
Intraindividual variability in context use revealed by selfpaced event-related brain potentials. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 29(5), 837-854. https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn_
a_01090
Payne, B. R., Stites, M. C., & Federmeier, K. D. (2019). Eventrelated brain potentials reveal how multiple aspects of
semantic processing unfold across parafoveal and foveal
vision during sentence reading. Psychophysiology, 56(10),
e13432. https://doi.org/10.1111/psyp.13432
Pollatsek, A., Lesch, M., Morris, R. K., & Rayner, K. (1992).
Phonological codes are used in integrating information
across saccades in word identification and reading. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 18(1), 148-162. https://doi.org/10.1037/00961523.18.1.148
Pulvermuller, F. (1995). Agrammatism: behavioral description
and neurobiological explanation. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 7(2), 165-181.
Rayner, K. (1998). Eye movements in reading and information
processing: 20 years of research. Psychological Bulletin, 124
(3), 372-422. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.124.3.372
Rayner, K., Balota, D. A., & Pollatsek, A. (1986). Against parafoveal semantic preprocessing during eye fixations in
reading. Canadian Journal of Psychology/Revue Canadienne
de Psychologie, 40(4), 473-483. https://doi.org/10.1037/
h0080111
Rayner, K., & Morris, R. K. (1992). Eye movement control in
reading: Evidence against semantic preprocessing. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 18(1), 163-172. https://doi.org/10.1037/00961523.18.1.163
Risse, S., & Kliegl, R. (2012). Evidence for delayed parafoveal-onfoveal effects from word n+2 in reading. Journal of
Experimental
Psychology:
Human
Perception
and
Performance, 38(4), 1026-1042. https://doi.org/10.1037/
a0027735
Schotter, E. R., & Jia, A. (2016). Semantic and plausibility
preview benefit effects in English: Evidence from eye movements. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 42(12), 1839-1866. https://doi.org/
10.1037/xlm0000281
Snell, J., Meade, G., Meeter, M., Holcomb, P., & Grainger, J.
(2019). An electrophysiological investigation of orthographic spatial integration in reading. Neuropsychologia,
129, 276-283. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.
2019.04.009
Stites, M. C., Payne, B. R., & Federmeier, K. D. (2017). Getting
ahead of yourself: Parafoveal word expectancy modulates
the N400 during sentence reading. Cognitive, Affective, &
Behavioral Neuroscience, 17(3), 475-490. https://doi.org/10.
3758/s13415-016-0492-6
Tanner, D, Morgan-Short, K, & Luck, S J. (2015). How inappropriate high-pass filters can produce artifactual effects and

104

C. LI ET AL.

incorrect conclusions in ERP studies of language and cognition. Psychophysiology, 52(8), 997-1009.
Tanner, D, & Van Hell, J G. (2014). ERPs reveal individual differences in morphosyntactic processing. Neuropsychologia, 56,
289-301.
Van De Meerendonk, N., Kolk, H. H., Vissers, C. T. W., & Chwilla,
D. J. (2010). Monitoring in language perception: Mild and
strong conflicts elicit different ERP patterns. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 22(1), 67-82. https://doi.org/10.
1162/jocn.2008.21170
Van Herten, M, Kolk, H H, & Chwilla, D J. (2005). An ERP study of
P600 effects elicited by semantic anomalies. Cognitive brain
research, 22(2), 241-255.
Van Petten, C., & Kutas, M. (1991). Influences of semantic and
syntactic context on open-and closed-class words. Memory
& Cognition, 19(1), 95-112. https://doi.org/10.3758/
BF03198500

Van Petten, C., & Luka, B. J. (2012). Prediction during language
comprehension: Benefits, costs, and ERP components.
International Journal of Psychophysiology, 83(2), 176-190.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2011.09.015
Veldre, A., & Andrews, S. (2016). Is semantic preview benefit
due to relatedness or plausibility? Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 42(7), 939-
952. https://doi.org/10.1037/xhp0000200
Veldre, A., & Andrews, S. (2018). Beyond cloze probability:
Parafoveal processing of semantic and syntactic information
during reading. Journal of Memory and Language, 100, 1-17.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2017.12.002
Wlotko, E W, & Federmeier, K D. (2012). So that's what you
meant! Event-related potentials reveal multiple aspects of
context use during construction of message-level
meaning. NeuroImage, 62(1), 356-366. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.neuroimage.2012.04.054

