Examining the impact of task demands
on morphological variability in native
and non-native Spanish*
Beatriz Lopez Prego and Alison Gabriele
University of Kansas

The study tests representational and computational accounts of morphological
variability in English-speaking learners of Spanish by examining performance on
gender and number agreement under different task demands. Second language
(L2) learners took either a Speeded grammaticality judgment task (GJT) or an
Untimed GJT. The tasks targeted agreement violations of two types: errors in
the use of `default' morphology and errors involving `feature clashes' (McCarthy,
2008). In addition, three groups of native speakers took the Speeded GJT at three
different presentation rates to examine whether native speakers under a processing burden perform similarly to learners. Natives in the fastest speed performed
better with feature clash errors for both gender and number. Learners showed
the same pattern for number, but performed better with default errors in gender,
suggesting different effects of processing demands for properties unique to the
L2. On the Untimed GJT, a subset of advanced learners showed perfect performance with both gender and number.
Keywords: L2 Spanish, L2 morphological variability, gender and number
agreement, markedness, task demands, default morphology.

1.

Introduction

It is well known that morphological variability is one of the hallmarks of second language (L2) acquisition (Franceschina, 2005; Hawkins & Casillas, 2008;
Hawkins & Chan, 1997; Hopp, 2010; Keating, 2009; Lardiere, 1998a, 1998b, 2000;
McCarthy, 2007; McDonald, 2006; Montrul, Foote, & Perpinan, 2008; Prevost
& White, 2000; White, Valenzuela, Kozlowska-Macgregor, & Leung, 2004, etc.).
Difficulty in the domain of morphosyntax has been observed even in otherwise
highly proficient learners (Franceschina, 2005; Lardiere, 1998a, 1998b; McCarthy,
Linguistic Approaches to Bilingualism 4:2 (2014), 192-221. doi 10.1075/lab.4.2.03lop
issn 1879-9264 / e-issn 1879-9272 (c) John Benjamins Publishing Company

Examining the impact of task demands on morphological variability in Spanish 193

2008). Morphological variability refers to cases in which learners variably supply
both correct and incorrect agreement morphology. To illustrate, in example (1a)
from Spanish, the learner correctly establishes agreement between the feminine,
singular noun falda "skirt," the determiner una "a," and the adjective roja "red."
However, in the continuation in (1b), the learner fails to correctly establish the
Noun-Adjective agreement dependency and uses the masculine, singular form of
the adjective bonito "cute" to refer to the same noun falda.
(1) a.


 b.


Tengo una falda
roja.
I have aFemSg skirtFemSg redFemSg
"I have a red skirt."
* Es muy bonito.
* It is very cuteMSg

Many studies have reported that the morphological variability observed in learners is in fact systematic (Bruhn de Garavito, 2003; Bruhn de Garavito & White,
2002; McCarthy, 2007, 2008, 2012; Montrul et al., 2008; Prevost & White, 2000;
Renaud, 2010, 2011, 2012; White et al., 2004) -- that is, agreement errors tend to
show specific asymmetries across learners. Specifically, error types like (2), where
masculine (2a) and singular (2b) forms are overextended to feminine and plural
contexts (respectively), seem to occur more frequently than (3), where feminine
(3a) and plural (3b) forms are incorrectly used in masculine and singular contexts,
respectively. These patterns are argued to reflect use of `default' morphology by
learners (McCarthy, 2008; Prevost & White, 2000; White et al., 2004) -- defaults
being defined as underspecified forms that appear in both target-like and nontarget-like positions (McCarthy, 2008).
(2) a.

 b.


La
casa
es *viejo.
theFemSg houseFemSg is oldMSg
Las
casas
son *vieja_.
theFemPl housesFemPl are oldFemSg

(3) a.

 b.


El
libro
es *vieja.
theMSg bookMSg is oldFemSg
La
casa
es *viejas.
theFemSg houseFemSg is oldFemPl

Some researchers have proposed a computational account of these errors that attributes the variability observed in L2 learners to performance or processing issues (Prevost & White, 2000). Interestingly, recent studies have shown that native
speakers exhibit qualitatively similar declines in accuracy to L2 learners, when
performing under processing pressure (Hopp, 2010; McDonald, 2006). In contrast, representational accounts of morphological variability (Franceschina, 2005;

194 Beatriz Lopez Prego and Alison Gabriele

Hawkins, 2001; Hawkins & Casillas, 2008; Hawkins & Chan, 1997; Tsimpli &
Dimitrakopoulou, 2007) argue that the source of learner variability is a deficit in
the abstract representation of L2 features, claiming that features not instantiated in
the native language (L1) are not acquirable in a L2 after a critical period.
In order to test these theories, the present study examines the use of default
morphology in English-speaking learners of Spanish in relation to different task
demands. We also explore whether native speakers show similar variability to
learners when completing tasks under a processing burden. If this is the case, processing difficulty may explain the learner variability. Crucially, we test agreement
with a feature unique to our learners' L2, gender, and a feature common to their
L1 and L2, number.
2. Gender and number agreement in Spanish
Determiners and adjectives must agree in both gender and number with the noun.1
There are two genders in Spanish: masculine and feminine. Canonical masculine
and feminine nouns consistently end in -o (4) and -a (5), respectively. Specifically,
99.9% of nouns that end in -o are masculine, and 96.3% of nouns that end in -a are
feminine (Teschner & Russel, 1984). Thus, in the case of canonical nouns, lexical
gender is transparent, while in the case of non-canonical nouns such as el mapa
"theMasc mapMasc," it is not. In tasks targeting agreement errors that involve noncanonical nouns such as el mapa, it is harder to tease apart whether the learner has
simply assigned the incorrect gender to the noun, or whether the learner has failed
to correctly establish a dependency between the noun and the agreeing element
in question. In order to avoid this potential confound, this paper focuses only on
nouns with canonical gender marking.2
(4) Los suelos son rojos.
 theMPl floorsMPl are redMPl
(5) La
casa
es roja.
 theFemSg houseFemSg is redFemSg

With respect to number, Spanish distinguishes singular and plural. The canonical plural is formed by adding an -s to the root of the noun as in (4), while the
canonical singular form is indicated by the absence of the plural inflection marker
as in (5).

Examining the impact of task demands on morphological variability in Spanish 195

3. Explaining L2 morphological variability
Several studies have argued that learner variability in gender and number agreement is systematic and reflective of the usage of default morphology (McCarthy,
2008; Montrul et al., 2008; White et al., 2004, in L2 Spanish; Prevost and White,
2000, in L2 German, and L2 French; Renaud, 2010, 2011, 2012, in L2 French).
Recall that in these studies, masculine and singular were used by learners as default forms -- that is, they were consistently overextended to feminine and plural contexts. Prevost and White (2000) proposed that the observed systematicity
stems from an asymmetrical representation of features, as characterized within the
Distributed Morphology (DM) framework (Halle & Marantz, 1993). According
to DM, the syntax is fully specified with features, whereas lexical items are not:
Features are not represented as binary, but rather as present or absent. Therefore,
some morphemes are specified for a given feature (like feminine, for feminine
gender), while others are underspecified (masculine only indicates the presence
of gender). When computing agreement, the item with the greatest number of
features matching those in the syntax should be inserted. However, if the syntax
contains a feature not specified in the lexical items competing for insertion, no
perfect match will be found, and a form containing a subset of those features (i.e.,
an underspecified or default form) can be inserted instead. Crucially, forms that
would lead to a `clash' of features cannot be inserted. Prevost and White (2000)
propose that learners may insert the `default' form when they have difficulty accessing the target, particularly in the context of demanding tasks. In these contexts, the parser may halt the search for a `perfect match' of features once it finds
a match in a subset of those features (the default form), thus freeing processing
resources to perform the task.
Building on Prevost and White's (2000) proposal, McCarthy (2008) investigated the use of default morphology in learners of Spanish. Following DM, McCarthy
assumes that markedness drives the specification of features: Underspecified features are unmarked, and specified features are marked (Cowper, 2005; Harley,
1994; Harley & Noyer, 1999; Harley & Ritter, 2002). In Spanish, masculine and
singular are the unmarked forms for gender and number, respectively, according
to Battistella's (1990) criteria for establishing markedness, and feminine and plural
are the marked forms. Based on this classification, McCarthy (2008) distinguishes
two possible agreement error types in L2 learners: Underspecification or Default
errors and Feature Clash errors.
In the examples (6) through (8), the head nouns are unmarked for number
(singular), and the examples (6) and (8) are also unmarked for gender (masculine). When a marked form of the adjective, either feminine (6) or plural (7-8),
is inserted, its features clash with the masculine/singular features denoted in the

196 Beatriz Lopez Prego and Alison Gabriele

syntactic context, resulting in a `Feature Clash' error. This type of error is ruled out
in DM.
(6) Gender feature clash
 El
libro
es *vieja.
 theMSg bookMSg is oldFemSg
(7) Number feature clash: Feminine noun
 La
casa
es *viejas.
 theFemSg houseFemSg is oldFemPl
(8) Number feature clash: Masculine noun
 El
libro
es *viejos.
 theMSg bookMSg is oldMPl

In examples (9) through (11), the opposite situation is illustrated. The head nouns
are marked feminine (9-10) or plural (10-11). If the unmarked masculine (9) or
singular (10-11) forms of the adjective are inserted, the result is a `Default' error.
The insertion of unmarked/default forms does not result in a clash with the features in the syntax, but rather in the insertion of a subset of those features, which
is compatible with DM.
(9) Gender default
 La
casa
es *viejo.
 theFemSg houseFemSg is oldMSg
(10) Number default: Feminine noun
 Las
casas
son *vieja_.
 theFemPl housesFemPl are oldFemSg
(11) Number default: Masculine noun
 Los libros
son *viejo_.
 theMPl booksMPl are oldMSg

McCarthy (2008) predicts that L2 errors will be instances of underspecification or
Default errors (9-11), but not Feature Clash errors (6-8). She explored this hypothesis by testing intermediate and advanced English-speaking learners of Spanish
in production and comprehension. Her results showed qualitatively similar error
patterns in both tasks: Default errors were more frequent than Feature Clash errors in both gender and number (although number errors were very limited).
If, in line with McCarthy's proposal, L2 errors are generally Default errors,
these may be harder for learners to detect than Feature Clash errors in tasks such
as grammaticality judgment. Consequently, the opposite pattern, Feature Clash
errors, may be easier to detect. Furthermore, in line with Prevost and White

Examining the impact of task demands on morphological variability in Spanish 197

(2000), performance may vary in accordance with task demands, with participants
showing greater acceptance of default morphology as task demands increase. The
present study examines these hypotheses in both learners and native speakers of
Spanish in order to test representational and computational accounts of morphological variability.
3.1 Representational accounts
The representational accounts posit a deficit in the L2 grammar as the source of
morphological variability in L2 learners. The theories included in this group claim
that parameter resetting is not possible after a certain age (Hawkins & Casillas,
2008; Hawkins & Chan, 1997; Tsimpli & Dimitrakopoulou, 2007). Thus, late learners cannot acquire native-like abstract representations of new features not specified
in the L1, resulting in an incomplete L2 grammar. The Interpretability Hypothesis
(Tsimpli & Dimitrakopoulou, 2007), a more recent version of the Failed Functional
Features Hypothesis (Hawkins & Chan, 1997), specifically claims that uninterpretable features that are not instantiated in the L1 are not acquirable to native-like
levels in the L2 by adult learners. In the case of gender and number in Spanish, it
is determiners and adjectives (the `targets' for agreement) that bear the uninterpretable feature, whereas these features are considered interpretable on the noun
(the `trigger' for agreement). Thus, if uninterpretable features are not acquired, the
establishment of agreement dependencies between those elements via a syntactic
feature checking mechanism becomes impossible, and learners' ability to compute
native-like agreement relations is compromised.
3.2 Computational accounts
The computational accounts claim that learner variability may be due to processing difficulty, rather than to a deficit in the L2 grammar. These theories argue for
parameter resetting via reassembly of the feature matrices of functional categories
(Lardiere, 2009). Thus, native-like attainment is in principle possible, regardless of
the learners' age of acquisition and of differences between the L1 and the L2 with
respect to feature inventories. The Missing Surface Inflection Hypothesis (MSIH;
Haznedar & Schwartz, 1997; Prevost & White, 2000), for example, argues that
learner performance does not accurately reflect the abstract representation of the
L2 feature matrices. Even when learners have correctly acquired and reassembled
the pertinent feature matrices, they may have difficulties accessing the target morphological form under a processing burden, perhaps during production, or when
completing particularly taxing tasks. Thus, this theory predicts that learners will
perform better on untimed tasks, where reduced pressures ease retrieval of the

198 Beatriz Lopez Prego and Alison Gabriele

relevant representations, than in spontaneous production or timed tasks, where
the immediacy of the speech act, or the timing of the task, can make computation
of agreement more taxing (see McCarthy, 2008, and Renaud, 2010, 2011, 2012).
In line with the computational accounts, it has been argued that lower working
memory capacity or poorer decoding ability in the L2 as compared to the L1 may
hinder the retrieval or access of L2 grammatical knowledge (McDonald, 2006).
The efficiency of the L2 parser is argued to further decrease as differences between
the L1 and L2 increase, especially if learners are under the burden of particularly
demanding tasks (Hopp, 2010; McDonald, 2006). Hopp (2010) tested this hypothesis by manipulating the processing load involved in different tasks and exploring its effects on learner performance. He investigated the processing of various
structures (case, S-V agreement, word order, etc.) in advanced and near-native
speakers of German from different L1 backgrounds (English, Dutch, and Russian).
Among the learners' L1s, Russian was the most similar to German with respect to
the morphological properties tested. The learners completed three tasks involving
different demands: an untimed GJT, a self-paced reading task (SPR task), and a
speeded GJT. Hopp's results showed that in the advanced group, only the Russians
performed like native speakers, and only in the untimed GJT. In the near-native
groups, the three L1 groups showed native-like performance in the untimed GJT
and in the SPR task, but only the L1 Russian group showed native-like performance in the speeded GJT. Hopp concluded first that learners can retrieve grammatical knowledge in untimed tasks regardless of the L1, but may not be able to
access it under an increased computational burden; and second, that the L1 may
facilitate or inhibit computation in the L2. In addition to learners, Hopp tested
native speakers of German under different processing loads to examine whether
native speakers, who have fully intact grammatical competence, would perform
like L2 learners under such burdens. Confirmation of this hypothesis would support a computational explanation for the variability observed in learners. Hopp
gave the native speakers the speeded GJT at five different rates of presentation.
Interestingly, the results showed similar declines in accuracy and similar error patterns in native and near-native speakers in their respective fastest speeds.
4. The present study
Building on McCarthy (2008) and Hopp (2010), as well as the earlier proposal by
Prevost and White (2000), the present study explores the use of default morphology in English-speaking learners and native speakers of Spanish in relation to different task demands, in order to investigate representational and computational
accounts of morphological variability. Specifically, we compare performance on

Examining the impact of task demands on morphological variability in Spanish 199

the detection of Default and Feature Clash violations of gender and number agreement (McCarthy, 2008) in tasks involving different processing efforts.
4.1 Research questions and hypotheses
We ask three questions, for which representational and computational theories
make different predictions.
1. Do L1-English learners of Spanish perform better with number than gender,
given the absence of gender in English?
If, in line with the Interpretability Hypothesis (Tsimpli & Dimitrakopoulou, 2007)
variability in agreement results from the lack of uninterpretable gender features in
the learners' native grammar, we should see an advantage in performance for number over gender, and non-native-like performance with gender in all proficiency
groups, regardless of task demands. If, in accordance with the MSIH (Haznedar
& Schwartz, 1997; Prevost & White, 2000), morphological variability in learners
results from processing issues, we may potentially find native-like performance for
both gender and number in advanced learners on tasks with a reduced processing
burden. Lower proficiency learners may show variability and an advantage with
number over gender even on less demanding tasks, due to L1 transfer at this initial
stage (Schwartz & Sprouse, 1996). In tasks involving high processing load, differences between the L1 and L2 may be exacerbated, resulting in better performance
with number than gender, even in advanced learners (Hopp, 2010).
2. Are learners more accurate detecting Feature Clash than Default errors?
The Interpretability Hypothesis (Tsimpli & Dimitrakopoulou, 2007) makes no
specific predictions about the two error types under investigation; this account
predicts general variability with gender. However, Hawkins (2001) argues that, in
order to compensate for the absence of uninterpretable gender features in the L2,
learners may resort to the adoption of a default, which in Romance languages can
be either masculine or feminine, together with the memorization of exceptions.
Therefore, English-speaking learners of Spanish are expected to exhibit persistent
optionality with gender agreement that would be translated into within-learner
systematicity in the use of a specific default, and crucially, across-learner variability with regards to the specific default chosen. Therefore, some learners may show
better performance with Feature Clash errors like un libro larga "aMSg bookMSg
longFemSg," while others may show better performance with Default errors like una
mesa alto "aFemSg tableFemSg tallMSg." On the other hand, the computational accounts
argue that morphological variability stems from difficulties accessing the target
form during online processing. According to the MSIH (Haznedar & Schwartz,

200 Beatriz Lopez Prego and Alison Gabriele

1997; Prevost & White, 2000), and building on DM, the specific asymmetry tested
(Feature Clash errors more accurate than Default errors) may emerge for learners
who have correctly acquired the relevant feature matrices, particularly in tasks
involving high computational load. The logic is that DM prohibits the insertion of
features that clash, which would make Feature Clash errors potentially easier for
learners to detect on a task such as a GJT. Default errors, which may be accepted in
the context of particularly demanding tasks, would be harder to detect.
3. How do different task demands impact learners' performance detecting gender versus number and Default versus Feature Clash errors?
Although the Interpretability Hypothesis does not make specific claims about
processing demands, if morphological variability in L2 learners of Spanish results
from representational issues with uninterpretable gender, all learner groups should
show general non-native-like performance with gender across all tasks. In addition, for a given learner group, no systematic feature asymmetries are expected to
emerge regardless of task. In contrast, the MSIH predicts potentially native-like
performance for highly proficient learners in tasks involving low processing demands. In more taxing tasks, use of default morphology, and possibly differences
between gender and number are expected to emerge.
We tested these questions by comparing learner performance in an Untimed
GJT versus a Speeded GJT. We also investigated whether native speaker accuracy is impacted by task demands, and whether native speakers are more accurate
detecting Feature Clash than Default errors. If, in line with representational accounts of morphological variability, native speakers and L2 learners have different
abstract representations of the gender feature, native speakers are not generally
expected to show similar variability as learners with gender, even under increased
task demands. If, on the other hand, morphological variability in L2 learners is due
to processing limitations as proposed by computational accounts, native speakers
completing a task with a high processing load may show similar declines in accuracy and similar feature asymmetries to learners. We addressed these questions by
comparing native performance in three Speeded GJTs that differed in the rate at
which the stimuli were presented.
4.2 Method
4.2.1 Stimuli
A total of 216 sentences were created, of which 108 were target items manipulating
agreement between a noun and a predicative adjective. The other 108 sentences
were distracter items (targeting subject-verb agreement, the clitic se "self," and
word order) and grammatical filler items (two types of relative clauses introduced

Examining the impact of task demands on morphological variability in Spanish 201

by either verbs such as gustar "like" or verbs of opinion such as creer "believe").
There were equal numbers of grammatical and ungrammatical items in the experiment.
Half of the target items included a masculine noun as the trigger of agreement,
and the other half, a feminine noun.3 There were six conditions for each target
item. A total of 54 sets of six sentences containing masculine nouns and 54 sets
of six sentences containing feminine nouns were generated. The example in (12)
presents one of the stimuli sets with a masculine noun as the trigger of agreement.
(12) a.


 b.


 c.


 d.


 e.


 f.



Grammatical masculine singular
Juan dijo que vio
un colegio que era antiguo en Londres.
Juan said that he saw a schoolMSg that was oldMSg in London
Gender feature clash
* Juan dijo que vio
un colegio que era antigua en Londres.
Juan said that he saw a schoolMSg that was oldFemSg in London
Number feature clash
* Juan dijo que vio
un colegio que era antiguos en Londres.
Juan said that he saw a schoolMSg that was oldMPl in London
Grammatical masculine plural
Juan dijo que vio
unos colegios que eran antiguos en Londres.
Juan said that he saw some schoolsMPl that were oldMPl in London
Number default
* Juan dijo que vio
unos colegios que eran antiguo_ en Londres.
Juan said that he saw some schoolsMPl that were oldMSg in London
Gender feature clash
* Juan dijo que vio
unos colegios que eran antiguas en Londres.
Juan said that he saw some schoolsMPl that were oldFemPl in London

The example in (13) presents one of the stimuli sets with a feminine noun as the
trigger of agreement. Note that in the case of the items with feminine nouns, the
two conditions targeting violations in gender agreement are both cases of Default
errors (13b and 13f):
(13) a.


 b.


 c.



Grammatical feminine singular
Juan dijo que vio
una tela
que era fina
en Paris.
Juan said that he saw a fabricFemSg that was fineFemSg in Paris
Gender default
* Juan dijo que vio
una tela
que era fino en Paris.
Juan said that he saw a fabricFemSg that was fineMSg in Paris
Number feature clash
* Juan dijo que vio
una tela
que era finas
en Paris.
Juan said that he saw a fabricFemSg that was fineFemPl in Paris

202 Beatriz Lopez Prego and Alison Gabriele

 d.


 e.


 f.



Grammatical feminine plural
Juan dijo que vio
unas telas
que eran finas
en Paris.
Juan said that he saw some fabricsFemPl that were fineFemPl in Paris
Number default
* Juan dijo que vio
unas telas
que eran fina
en Paris.
Juan said that he saw some fabricsFemPl that were fineFemSg in Paris
Gender default
* Juan dijo que vio
unas telas
que eran finos en Paris.
Juan said that he saw some fabricsFemPl that were fineMPl in Paris

All of the target conditions involved agreement between a noun and an adjective within a relative clause; the critical nouns and adjectives were consistently
separated by the relative pronoun que "that" and the copula era(n) "was/were." The
agreement dependency is non-local, as the agreeing elements are separated by a
Complementizer Phrase.4
Due to the study's focus on error types, the analysis will examine the ungrammatical conditions only.5 Table 1 summarizes the target ungrammatical conditions for the masculine and feminine experimental items, respectively.6
Table 1. Conditions tested according to noun-adjective agreement errors
Gender

Number

Error type Masculine

Feminine

Default

telaFemSg-*finoMSg
telasFemPl-*finosMPl

Feature clash colegioMSg-*antiguaFemSg
colegiosMPl-*antiguasFemPl

Singular

Plural
colegiosMPl-*antiguoMSg
telasFemPl-*finaFemSg

colegioMSg-*antiguosMPl
telaFemSg-*finasFemPl

All of the nouns and adjectives included in the study were controlled for canonicity, dialectal variation, and frequency7 (masculine vs. feminine nouns, and
masculine vs. feminine adjectives). Items were distributed across six lists using
a Latin-square design, therefore, each participant saw one version of each of the
target items (see 12 and 13), and no participant saw more than one item from each
stimulus set.
4.2.2 Procedure and tasks
The participants first signed a consent form and filled out a linguistic background
questionnaire. Participants then performed a GJT on a computer in either a speeded or an untimed format. These tasks were administered using the stimulus presentation program Paradigm (Tagliaferri, 2005). Participants were asked to judge

Examining the impact of task demands on morphological variability in Spanish 203

whether the sentences presented were possible sentences in Spanish. Ten practice
items with feedback on the subjects' judgments modeled possible/impossible sentences in Spanish. Practice items did not target agreement. After the experimental
task, the learners took a language proficiency test.
4.2.2.1 Speeded GJT. Following Hopp (2010) and previous studies (Bader &
Meng, 1999; Meng & Bader, 2000; Sato, 2007; Schlesewsky & Frisch, 2003; Vogel &
Frisch, 2003), we used a Speeded GJT to measure responses under a high processing load. The Speeded GJT tested the subjects' ability to rapidly detect and judge
gender and number agreement violations presented at an elevated rate. The participants read sentences in Spanish on a computer screen and judged their grammaticality by pressing keys labeled Bien "good" or Mal "bad" on the keyboard. They
were instructed to respond as quickly and as accurately as possible. The sentences
were presented in the middle of the screen following a fixation star, in rapid serial
visual presentation (RSVP) format -- word by word, at a specific rate. After the
sentence was presented the words Bien and Mal appeared on the screen. As soon
as the participants selected their response, the fixation star appeared on the screen
again, and the participants could rest or move on to the next sentence. Five breaks
were offered throughout the experiment. In this task, both acceptance rates and
reaction times (henceforth, RTs) were recorded for analysis.
For native speakers, we used three different base presentation rates to manipulate processing demands: 155 ms per word for Speed 1; 71 ms per word for Speed
2; and 37 ms per word for Speed 3;8 17 milliseconds per character were then added
to each of the base presentation rates in order to adjust the time of presentation
of the words to their length.9 In order to make the task more taxing, we also included a visual distracter consisting of 12 hash marks (############), which was
presented for 50 ms between each word. For the learners, only Speed 1 was used.
4.2.2.2 Untimed GJT. This untimed format of the task was used in order to make
the task accessible to learners from a wide range of proficiency levels, and it was
only administered to L2 learners. In this format, the whole sentence was presented
at once, with no time limit to read or judge the sentence, and no visual distracter
included. Given the untimed nature of the task, only accuracy rates were recorded.
The task included the same sentences as the Speeded GJT.
4.3 Participants
Table 2 shows the distribution of the participants tested on each task. L2 learners
(n = 108) were recruited from Spanish classes ranging from third-semester classes
(level 200) to graduate seminars at the University of Kansas. All the learners were

204 Beatriz Lopez Prego and Alison Gabriele

Table 2. Participants by task
Groups

Speed 1 (155ms/
word +17ms/
character)

Speed 2 (71ms/
word +17ms/
character)

Speed 3 (37ms/
word +17ms/
character)

Untimed
GJT

Natives

n = 12

n = 36

n = 36

-

n = 24
n = 18
n = 18

-
-
-

-
-
-

n = 18
n = 12
n = 18

L2

Low
Intermediate
Advanced

English native speakers with no substantial exposure to Spanish or other Romance
languages before age 12. Participants were grouped as low (n = 42; mean age = 20.60;
mean age of acquisition = 14.05), intermediate (n = 30; mean age = 22.07; mean age
of acquisition = 13.90), and advanced (n = 36; mean age = 26.47; mean age of acquisition = 14.75), according to the MLA/DELE Spanish proficiency test (Montrul,
2005), which has been used in a number of studies investigating gender and number agreement (McCarthy, 2007; Montrul, 2005, 2008; White et al., 2004). The 50item test classifies learners as follows: 0-29, low proficiency; 30-39, intermediate
proficiency; 40-50, advanced proficiency.
The native speakers who completed the task at Speeds 2 and 3 (n = 72) were
recruited and tested at a university in Spain; 36 participants (mean age = 20.67)
took the experiment at Speed 3 (37ms+), and another 36 participants (mean
age = 20.53) took it at Speed 2 (71ms+). For Speed 1 (155ms+), data were collected
from 12 Spanish native speakers (mean age = 27.25) tested either in Spain or the
United States. All native participants had studied at the university level and had
different occupations at the time of testing.
5. Results
Statistical analyses are reported on acceptance rates and RTs10 for the ungrammatical conditions only.11 Separate analyses were conducted for the Speeded GJT
and the Untimed GJT, as well as for learners and native speakers. Statistical significance was set at a p value of .05, while p values larger than .05 and smaller than or
equal to .10 are reported as marginally significant.
5.1 L2 Learner results
We conducted a mixed-repeated-measures ANOVA with Feature (Gender vs.
Number) and Error (Default vs. Feature Clash) as within-subjects factors and

Examining the impact of task demands on morphological variability in Spanish 205

Proficiency Level (low, intermediate, advanced) as the between-subjects factor, for
both acceptance rates and RTs. Planned 2x2 repeated-measures ANOVAs with
Feature and Error as within-subjects factors were then performed separately for
each proficiency group.

Speeded GJT

5.1.1

5.1.1.1 Accuracy. Figure 1 represents the mean acceptance rates for gender and
number errors for low, intermediate, and advanced learners on the Speeded GJT.
Note that lower acceptance rates indicate more accurate performance. Results
showed a significant effect of Proficiency Level, F(2,57) = 15.89, p < .01. Pairwise
comparisons showed no differences between the low and intermediate groups
(p = .14); the advanced group performed significantly better than both the low
and intermediate groups (p < .01). A significant effect of Feature was also present,
F(1,57) = 44.86, p < .01, reflecting higher accuracy rejecting Number than Gender
errors. There was a significant interaction of Error x Feature, F(1,57) = 13.85,
p < .01, which was qualified by an interaction of Error x Feature x Proficiency
Level, F(1,57) = 3.20, p < .05. Finally, there was a marginal interaction of Feature x
Proficiency Level, F(1,57) = 2.89, p = .06. These interactions were explored in separate 2x2 repeated-measures ANOVAs for the learners in each proficiency level.
Results for the low proficiency learners showed that they were more accurate rejecting Number than Gender errors, F(1,23) = 6.32, p < .05, but they did
not show differences between Feature Clash and Default errors, or an interaction
L2 Speeded GJT Acceptance Rates
100

Acceptance rates (%)

90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Fem.sg/pl-*Masc.sg/pl Masc.sg/pl-*Fem.sg/pl Pl.m/fem-*Sg.m/fem
Gender Default
Gender F. Clash
Number Default
Low

Intermediate

Sg.m/fem-*Pl.m/fem
Number F. Clash

Advanced

Figure 1. L2 Learners: Mean acceptance of gender and number Default and Feature
Clash errors across proficiency levels on the Speeded GJT

206 Beatriz Lopez Prego and Alison Gabriele

between Feature and Error. Intermediate learners showed more accurate rejection
of Number than Gender errors, F(1,17) = 33.99, p < .01. They also showed a significant interaction of Error x Feature, F(1,17) = 10.28, p < .01. Follow-up pairedsamples t-tests revealed higher accuracy rejecting Feature Clash than Default
errors for number, t(17) = 2.56, p < .05. For gender, the reverse pattern, higher
accuracy rejecting Default than Feature Clash errors, was marginally significant,
t(17) = -2.06, p = .055. Advanced learners also showed more accurate rejection of
Number than Gender errors, F(1,17) = 13.39, p < .01, and a significant interaction
of Error x Feature, F(1,17) = 13.18, p < .01. Follow-up t-tests showed that learners were more accurate rejecting Feature Clash than Default errors for number,
t(17) = 2.12, p < .05, but more accurate rejecting Default than Feature Clash errors
for gender, t(17) = -2.78, p < .05.
5.1.1.2 Reaction Times. RTs for each trial for each participant were transformed
into z-scores12 in order to control for individual variation in response speed. Trials
in which RTs were longer or shorter than two standard deviations from the participant's mean were not included in the analysis.13 Figure 2 represents mean RTs
for the error types tested, in the low, intermediate, and advanced groups.14
Results from the mixed-repeated-measures ANOVA including the three proficiency groups showed a significant effect of Proficiency Level, F(2,44) = 5.65,
p < .01. Pairwise comparisons showed no differences between the intermediate
and low groups (p = .93); the advanced group responded significantly faster than
L2 Speeded GJT Reaction Times
-0.9
-0.8

RTZ-scores

-0.7
-0.6
-0.5
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
Fem.sg/pl-*Masc.sg/pl Masc.sg/pl-*Fem.sg/pl Pl.m/fem-*Sg.m/fem
Gender Default

Gender F. Clash
Low

Intermediate

Number Default

Sg.m/fem-*Pl.m/fem
Number F. Clash

Advanced

Figure 2. L2 Learners: Mean Reaction Times (in z-scores) of gender and number Default
and Feature Clash errors across proficiency levels on the Speeded GJT

Examining the impact of task demands on morphological variability in Spanish 207

the intermediate (p = .05) and low (p < .01) groups. A significant effect of Feature
was also present, F(1,57) = 21.52, p < .01, reflecting faster times for Number
than Gender errors. In addition, there were significant interactions of Feature x
Proficiency Level, F(2,57) = 9.42, p < .01, and Error x Feature, F(1,57) = 5.41, p < .05.
These interactions were explored in separate 2x2 repeated-measures ANOVAs for
learners at each proficiency level.
Results for the low proficiency group revealed no significant differences. The
intermediate group was faster with Number than Gender, F(1,17) = 13.85, p < .01.
This was also true for the advanced group, F(1,17) = 16.56, p < .01. However, in the
advanced group, there was also an interaction of Error x Feature, F(1,17) = 6.66,
p < . 05, which corresponded to faster RTs to Default than Feature Clash errors for
gender, t(17) = -2.34, p < .05, and no difference between the error types for number, t(17) = 1.60, p = .13.
5.1.1.3 Summary. On the Speeded GJT, the three groups were more accurate rejecting Number than Gender errors, which also translated into faster RTs with
Number than Gender, but only in the intermediate and advanced groups. The intermediate group was also more accurate rejecting Feature Clash than Default errors for number, while for gender, this group was marginally more accurate rejecting Default than Feature Clash errors, an unexpected result. The advanced group
showed the same overall pattern as the intermediate group, except that in the advanced group the difference between the error types for gender was significant
(not marginal) and was also reflected in faster RTs with Default than Feature Clash
errors. Thus, although the strength of the different patterns differs, the patterns
themselves are highly consistent across the learner groups.
5.1.2 Untimed GJT
Figure 3 represents the mean acceptance rates for gender and number errors for
the low, intermediate, and advanced groups on the Untimed GJT. Results for the
mixed-repeated-measures ANOVA showed a significant effect of Proficiency
Level, F(2,45) = 10.57, p < .01. Pairwise comparisons revealed no differences between advanced and intermediate learners (p = .50); intermediate learners were
more accurate than low proficiency learners (p < .05), as were the advanced learners (p < .01). A significant effect of Feature was present, F(1,45) = 21.77, p < .01, reflecting more accurate rejection of Number than Gender errors. There was also a
significant interaction of Error x Feature, F(1,45) = 6.28, p < .05. Results for each
proficiency level will be presented individually below.
Results for the low and intermediate groups revealed that learners were
more accurate rejecting Number than Gender errors, F(1,17) = 4.79, p < .05, and
F(1,11) = 14.47, p < .01, respectively. The same pattern was marginal for advanced

208 Beatriz Lopez Prego and Alison Gabriele

L2 Untimed GJT Acceptance Rates
100

Acceptance rates (%)

90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Fem.sg/pl-*Masc.sg/pl Masc.sg/pl-*Fem.sg/pl Pl.m/fem-*Sg.m/fem
Gender Default

Gender F. Clash
Low

Intermediate

Number Default

Sg.m/fem-*Pl.m/fem
Number F. Clash

Advanced

Figure 3. L2 Learners: Mean acceptance of gender and number Default and Feature
Clash errors across proficiency levels on the Untimed GJT

learners, F(1,17) = 3.82, p = .067. In order to explore the marginal result for the
advanced group, we examined performance at the individual level. A subset of six
learners with the highest proficiency scores (47 and above, out of 50) showed perfect performance in this task (0% acceptance of the errors). Of the other advanced
learners, eight showed error acceptance rates of 5.6%; three learners had error acceptance rates between 11% and 17%; one learner showed an error acceptance rate
of 67%. None of the groups showed differences between Default and Feature Clash
errors, or Error x Feature interactions.
To sum up, the low and intermediate proficiency groups showed an advantage
for Number over Gender on the untimed task. This advantage emerged as marginal for advanced learners as a group; examination of individual results shows
variability within the advanced group but one third of the learners performed at
ceiling. None of the groups showed significant differences between Default and
Feature Clash errors on the untimed task.
5.2 Native speaker results
We conducted a mixed-repeated-measures ANOVA with Feature (Gender vs.
Number) and Error (Default vs. Feature Clash) as within-subjects factors, and Speed
(Speed 1 = 155ms+; Speed 2 = 71ms+; Speed 3 = 37ms+) as the between-subjects factor. Planned follow-up 2x2 repeated-measures ANOVAs with Feature and Error as
within-subjects factors were then performed separately for each speed group.

Examining the impact of task demands on morphological variability in Spanish 209

5.2.1 Accuracy
Figure 4 represents the mean acceptance rates for gender and number errors for
the three groups. The results for the mixed-repeated-measures ANOVA showed a
significant effect of Speed, F(2,81) = 8.75, p < .01. Pairwise comparisons revealed
no differences between the Speed 1 and Speed 2 groups (p = .28). The Speed 3
group was significantly less accurate than both the Speed 2 (p < .05) and Speed
1 (p < .01) groups. There was an effect of Error, F(1,81) = 11.12, p < .01, reflecting
better performance rejecting Feature Clash than Default conditions. There was
also a significant interaction of Error x Feature, F(1,81) = 4.21, p < .05. Paired samples t-tests showed that for number, native speakers were more accurate rejecting
Feature Clash than Default errors, t(83) = 4.51, p < .01, but for gender there were
no differences between the two error types, t(83) = 1.19, p = .24.
Results for the native speakers in Speed 1 (155ms+) revealed no significant
effects or interactions. The Speed 2 group (71ms+) showed a significant effect of
Error, F(1,36) = 9.78, p < . 01, corresponding to higher accuracy rejecting Feature
Clash than Default errors. The results also revealed an interaction of Error x
Feature, F(1, 35) = 10.31, p < .01, which reflected better performance rejecting
Feature Clash than Default errors for number, t(35) = 3.94, p < .01, as opposed to
no difference between Default and Feature Clash errors for gender, t(35) = .11,
p = .92. For Speed 3 (37ms+), there was a marginally significant effect of Feature,
F(1,35) = 3.96, p = .054, reflecting higher accuracy rejecting Gender than Number
errors.15 This group was more accurate rejecting Feature Clash than Default errors
both for gender and number, F(1,36) = 8.66, p = .01.
Natives Speeded GJT Acceptance Rates
100

Acceptance rates (%)

90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Fem.sg/pl-*Masc.sg/pl Masc.sg/pl-*Fem.sg/pl Pl.m/fem-*Sg.m/fem
Gender Default

Gender F. Clash
Speed 1: 155ms+

Number Default

Speed 2: 71ms+

Sg.m/fem-*Pl.m/fem
Number F. Clash

Speed 3: 37ms+

Figure 4. Native Speakers: Mean acceptance of gender and number Default and Feature
Clash errors across speeds

210 Beatriz Lopez Prego and Alison Gabriele

5.2.2 RTs
With regards to the RT data, neither the ANOVA with the three speed groups,
nor the separate ANOVAs for each group revealed any differences in RTs between
Gender versus Number or Default versus Feature Clash.16 Figure 5 shows the
mean RTs for gender and number error types for the three speed groups.17
Natives Speeded GJT Reaction Times
-0.9
-0.8

RTZ-scores

-0.7
-0.6
-0.5
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
Fem.sg/pl-*Masc.sg/pl Masc.sg/pl-*Fem.sg/pl Pl.m/fem-*Sg.m/fem
Gender Default

Gender F. Clash

Speed 1: 155ms+

Number Default

Speed 2: 71ms+

Sg.m/fem-*Pl.m/fem
Number F. Clash

Speed 3: 37ms+

Figure 5. Native Speakers: Mean Reaction Times (in z-scores) of gender and number
Default and Feature Clash errors across speeds

5.2.3 Summary
Native speakers in Speed 3 were more accurate rejecting Feature Clash than
Default errors for both gender and number. Native speakers in Speed 2 showed
this same pattern, but only for number. The differences that emerged in these two
groups were not reflected in RTs. In Speed 1, the least demanding task, no significant effects were observed either in acceptance rates or RTs.
6. Discussion
We examined learners' and native speakers' ability to detect different types of
agreement violations under different task demands, in order to investigate three
questions that test the predictions of representational and computational accounts
of morphological variability:

Examining the impact of task demands on morphological variability in Spanish

1. Do L1-English learners of Spanish perform better with number than gender,
given the absence of gender in English?
On the Speeded GJT, the three learner groups performed better with number, the
feature instantiated in their L1. In addition, intermediate and advanced learners
were slower responding to gender violations, as compared to number violations.
In contrast, the results for the natives did not show such advantages for number. Therefore, these results may lend support to the Interpretability Hypothesis
(Tsimpli & Dimitrakopoulou, 2007).
However, if the different results for the speeded versus untimed tasks for the
learners are taken into account, they may provide support for processing accounts,
which predict differences between the L1 and L2 to be exacerbated under burdensome task demands (Hopp, 2010). On the Untimed GJT, the advantage with number persisted in the low and intermediate learner groups, while it was only marginal for the advanced group. Crucially, a subset of six advanced learners showed
perfect performance in the task. The fact that native-like performance with gender
is possible in the absence of an additional computational burden is more in line
with processing accounts.
It is possible, as an anonymous reviewer points out, that the untimed task
allowed the advanced learners to use an explicit metalinguistic strategy, thus accounting for their improved performance. While this cannot be ruled out, the
results for the intermediate learners on the Untimed GJT are interesting in this
respect: Although the intermediate learners did not differ from the advanced
learners in overall accuracy on the Untimed GJT, they were still significantly more
accurate with number than gender, while advanced learners did not show this
asymmetry. The persistence of the number advantage for the intermediate learners, even at such high levels of accuracy, may suggest that the learners were not
relying only on an explicit strategy. The current study used an untimed task in
order to include a measure that would be accessible even to low proficiency learners. However, an important follow-up study would compare learner performance
on (at least) two versions of the speeded task in order to decrease the potential for
metalinguistic knowledge to be used. This would also allow us to more directly
compare the effects of the processing burden on learners and native speakers.
2. Are learners and native speakers more accurate detecting Feature Clash than
Default errors?
Low proficiency learners did not show differences in either of the tasks; this result
may be due to their general lack of sensitivity to the agreement violations, which
could potentially be impacted by the complexity of the structure tested, or perhaps
difficulty with the lexical items18 on the task. On the Speeded GJT, intermediate

211

212 Beatriz Lopez Prego and Alison Gabriele

and advanced learners showed the predicted pattern for number (higher accuracy
detecting Feature Clash than Default errors) and unexpectedly, they showed the
reverse pattern for gender (higher accuracy with Default [14] than Feature Clash
[15] errors), a result that was also reflected in faster RTs to Default errors for the
advanced learners. These feature asymmetries did not arise for the intermediate
and advanced learners on the untimed task.
(14) Gender default
 * Juan dijo que vio
una tela
que era fino en Paris.
 Juan said that he saw a fabricFemSg that was fineMSg in Paris
(15) Gender feature clash
 * Juan dijo que vio
un colegio que era antigua en Londres.
 Juan said that he saw a schoolMSg that was oldFemSg in London

With respect to native speakers, while no asymmetries emerged in RTs, they
did emerge in acceptance rates as speed increased: The native speaker group in
the slowest speed (Speed 1) showed no differences; the Speed 2 group showed
the predicted pattern for number (better performance with Feature Clash than
Default errors) and no difference for gender; the group in the fastest speed (Speed
3) showed the predicted pattern for both gender and number. The fact that the
asymmetries observed for native speakers and learners were similar when the feature involved was shared by the learners' L1 and L2 (number) but were different
when the feature in question was unique to the L2 (gender) may be interpreted
as more in line with the predictions of the Interpretability Hypothesis. However,
it is important to point out that the theory does not predict asymmetries in one
direction or the other. According to Hawkins (2001), either gender (feminine or
masculine) can be chosen as the default in order to compensate for the deficit in
gender features. In addition, the presence of feature asymmetries in the native
speaker groups may suggest that default morphology results from limited processing resources, rather than a deficit in the grammar. As we have discussed, this
conclusion must be tempered due to the differential manipulation of processing
burden in learners (Speeded GJT vs. Untimed GJT) and native speakers (variation
in speed). However, it is interesting that the same pattern emerged for number for
both learners and native speakers, and only in the more demanding task for each
group, respectively. Therefore, it is possible that both groups showed feature asymmetries due to increased task demands but were impacted differently for gender,
given that it is the feature not instantiated in the learners' L1.
It should also be pointed out that higher accuracy with Default as opposed
to Feature Clash errors is not predicted by the MSIH account either (Haznedar
& Schwartz, 1997; Prevost & White, 2000), which predicts the reverse pattern.

Examining the impact of task demands on morphological variability in Spanish 213

However, it is important to note that this prediction only considers the default
status of the target of agreement (the adjective fino "fine" in [14]) as opposed to
considering the markedness of the trigger as well (the noun una tela "a fabric" in
[14]). If we consider the incremental processing of (14) as would be required by
the Speeded GJT, a marked feature (feminine) comes first in linear order in the
trigger tela "fabric," providing reliable evidence of the value of the gender feature.
This may facilitate a prediction about the upcoming gender feature of the adjective later in the sentence (see Wagers, Lau, Stroud, McElree, & Phillips, 2009). In
contrast, in (15), the presence of a masculine noun provides information only of
the presence of gender, not a specific feature value, as masculine is unmarked. In
the absence of gender specification, a prediction about subsequent features that
may follow in the sentence may not be generated. As Wagers and McElree (2011)
discuss, the parser can conclude more by the presence of a feature than by its
absence. Thus, upon encountering the disagreeing feminine adjective in (15), the
parser may, particularly under a processing burden, `fill in' the gender feature with
a feminine specification, leading to an acceptance of the agreement violations in
(15).19 The type of incremental processing required by the Speeded GJT is very
different from that involved in production or offline comprehension tasks. This
might explain the contrast between our results and those of previous studies examining morphological variability, which have generally observed more Default
than Feature Clash errors (McCarthy, 2008; Prevost & White, 2000; White et al.,
2004). These patterns raise the interesting question of exactly how native speakers and learners use the information provided by marked and unmarked features
in the course of online processing, a question that should be examined in future
studies. Nevertheless, it remains to be explained why this specific pattern (Default
better than Feature Clash) did not emerge for number, nor in the native speaker
results. The computational accounts may attribute these differences to the computational burden of processing features that differ between the L1 and the L2,
particularly under the demanding conditions of the Speeded GJT.
3. How do different task demands impact participants' performance detecting
gender versus number and Default versus Feature Clash errors?
As is summarized above, differences in gender and number emerged to a greater extent for learners on the speeded task. On the untimed task, the differences
between gender and number were significant only for the low and intermediate
learners, while a subgroup of advanced learners showed native-like performance
on this task. With respect to the Default versus Feature Clash comparison, differences emerged for both learners and native speakers only in their respective most
demanding task. An interesting follow-up study would test the same learners in
both the untimed and speeded tasks. This would allow an analysis of the speeded

214 Beatriz Lopez Prego and Alison Gabriele

task results including only the items correctly judged in the untimed task, which,
as an anonymous reviewer points out, would provide a more accurate picture of
the effects of processing burden in relation to feature asymmetries, and each of the
learners' knowledge of gender assignment.
In terms of overall performance, task demands particularly impacted intermediate learners: In the Speeded GJT, the intermediate group was not different
from the low group, while on the Untimed GJT, the intermediate group was not
significantly different from the advanced group. These results may suggest a differential impact of task demands across developmental stages. Specifically, reduced
demands at low levels of proficiency may not help improve performance as noticeably given the learners' limited knowledge of the L2, consistent with the results for
our low proficiency group across tasks. At the intermediate level, the learner has
more extensive knowledge of the L2 but may not be able to access this knowledge
in an automatic manner, which would result in the substantial impact of task demands observed here. At the advanced levels of proficiency, task demands may
more distinctly interact with individual differences, with some learners showing
better abilities to process the L2, such as the subset of advanced learners who performed at ceiling in the untimed task.
In conclusion, the fact that feature asymmetries emerged both in learners and
native speakers, and only under the more taxing task conditions, may be interpreted as supporting computational accounts. This conclusion should be further
explored in a study that manipulates the processing burden in the same way in
the two groups. Overall, the study has also shown that morphological variability
may be modulated by the L1 in learners20 (Hopp, 2010) and by task demands and
feature markedness in both learners and native speakers. How both learners and
native speakers use markedness information in the course of online processing is
an interesting question that should be examined in future studies.

Notes
* This project was supported by a General Research Fund award from the University of Kansas
(to Alison Gabriele). We are grateful to Carlos Acuna Farina and Amy Rossomondo for help
with recruitment, and to Jose Aleman Banon, Robert Fiorentino, Holger Hopp, Steve PolitzerAhles, Bonnie Schwartz, and the Research in Acquisition and Processing seminar group for
helpful feedback on this project. Finally, we would like to thank Laurent Dekydtspotter, Claire
Renaud, and the three anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments and feedback on this
paper.
1. For detailed descriptions of the syntactic agreement mechanisms for gender and number, see
Carstens (2000), Picallo (1991), or Ritter (1993), among others.

Examining the impact of task demands on morphological variability in Spanish 215
2. An anonymous reviewer points out that selection of canonically marked nouns does not
guarantee that the learners know the gender of the nouns. Ideally, the learners would have also
been tested on their knowledge of lexical gender, following the GJT. However, in related studies
conducted in our lab (see Gabriele, Fiorentino, & Aleman Banon, 2013), even low-proficiency
learners scored at 99% on a gender assignment task that included similar lexical items. Thus, it
is unlikely that the gender assignment of the nouns included in our study presented difficulty
to the learners.
3. Forty-nine of the total 108 nouns used come from Aleman-Banon, Fiorentino, and Gabriele
(2012), an ERP study on the processing of gender and number agreement by L2 learners of
Spanish. All the adjectives included in the experimental items except two, come from this study
as well.
4. Previous studies have shown that it is harder for learners (and in some cases native speakers) to establish agreement dependencies across major constituent boundaries, as compared to
agreement in local domains (Foucart & Frenck-Mestre, 2012; Gillon-Dowens, Vergara, Barber,
& Carreiras, 2010; Keating, 2009). We focused on across-phrase agreement in this study in order
to increase the likelihood of observing errors in agreement, thus better allowing us to compare
between the two error types investigated here.
5. Including the grammatical conditions in the analysis potentially obscures the ability to observe differences in the error types (default vs. feature clash) as the grammatical baseline sentence for the two error types is not the same (see 12 and 13). In Appendix C we provide descriptive results of the items in the grammatical conditions.
6. Although we did not predict any differences between gender errors in the singular versus
gender errors in the plural, or between number errors in the feminine versus number errors in
the masculine, we included these conditions in the stimuli in order to be comprehensive. For
statistical analyses we collapsed across number (sg/pl) conditions for the gender analysis and
across gender (fem/m) conditions for the number analysis, yielding 18 items per condition.
7. Frequencies were tallied from the LEXESP corpus (Sebastian-Galles, Marti-Antonin,
Carreiras-Valina, & Cuetos-Vega, 2000). Paired t-tests conducted for Masculine versus Feminine
nouns in their singular form (t(53) = .44; p = .67), and in their plural form (t(53) = .72; p = .48)
revealed no significant differences in frequency. Similarly, no differences were found between
singular adjectives in the Gender Feature Clash condition (feminine) versus singular adjectives
in the Gender Default condition (masculine) (t(53) = .51; p = .61), or between plural adjectives
in the Gender Feature Clash condition (feminine) versus plural adjectives in the Gender Default
condition (masculine) (t(54) = .49; p = .62). Adjectives in the Number Default condition (singular) were more frequent than adjectives in the Number Feature Clash condition (plural), both in
their masculine (t(53) = 5.28; p < .01) and feminine (t(53) = 10.98; p < .01) forms. If these differences in number frequency impact our results, subjects would be more sensitive to the Number
Default errors than Number Feature Clash errors. However, the reverse pattern was observed
(see Results section).
8. We selected these speeds based on previous studies using the task (Bader & Meng, 1999;
Hopp, 2010; Meng & Bader, 2000; Schlesewsky & Frisch, 2003; Vogel & Frisch, 2003), and our
own pilot study testing learners and native speakers. Following Hopp (2010), we tested different

216 Beatriz Lopez Prego and Alison Gabriele
speeds obtained by repeatedly subtracting 17 ms from the base presentation rate used in Hopp
(2010), until a decrease in accuracy was observed in native speakers.
9. The critical words (the adjectives) in our stimuli were three to twelve characters long.
Consequently, in Speed 1, the critical words were presented on the screen for 206 ms to 376 ms;
in Speed 2, the range of presentation was from 122 ms to 292 ms; and in Speed 3, the range was
from 88 ms to 258 ms.
10. The mean acceptance rates and reaction times for the target ungrammatical conditions for
each of the groups tested are presented in Appendices A and B.
11. The mean acceptance rates for the grammatical conditions for each of the groups are presented in Appendix C.
12. A log transformation was also performed on the raw RTs; follow-up analyses showed no
differences in the pattern of results from what is reported here.
13. The percentage of data removed in each learner group was: 5.24% in the low group; 5.14% in
the intermediate group; 4.33% in the advanced group.
14. The analyses reported here include RTs for both correct and incorrect trials because the
focus of the study is on (incorrect) acceptance of the two error types and potential differences
between them. Analyses including correct trials only were also performed. In these analyses,
the low and intermediate groups were not significantly different (p = 1.00), while the advanced
group was significantly faster than both the low and intermediate groups (p < .01). The results for
the low proficiency group showed no effects. The intermediate and advanced groups were faster
with Number than Gender (p < .01). No feature asymmetries emerged in any group.
15. Results of studies conducted with native speakers generally seem to suggest that gender and
number are processed similarly (Acuna-Farina, 2009). Some studies (e.g., Barber & Carreiras,
2005) have reported differences in the late stages of processing, which they attribute to the costlier reanalysis of gender as compared to number, due to lexical properties of gender. Therefore,
the higher accuracy observed for gender in the present study is an interesting result that requires
further study. Nonetheless, this issue is beyond the scope of the present study.
16. Results for the analyses performed on correct trials only showed the same results.
17. The percentage of data removed in the native speaker groups due to trimming was: 4.55% in
Speed 1; 4.67% in Speed 2; 4.85% in Speed 3.
18. An effort was made to include vocabulary items that would be familiar to low proficiency
learners. However, in order to control for all of the relevant factors, some lexical items were
included that did not appear in the textbooks for the lower proficiency learners.
19. We thank Laurent Dekydtspotter for this suggestion and discussion of this point.
20. Ideally, as an anonymous reviewer suggests, an additional L1 English group would have
been tested on the processing of number in their native language, in order to make a stronger
claim about the role of the L1 in morphological variability. Additionally, an L2 Spanish group
whose L1 also instantiates gender agreement could be included to further examine the effects
of L1-L2 differences.

Examining the impact of task demands on morphological variability in Spanish 217

References
Acuna-Farina, J. C. (2009). The linguistics and psycholinguistics of agreement: A tutorial overview. Lingua, 119(3), 389-424. DOI: 10.1016/j.lingua.2008.09.005
Aleman-Banon, J., Fiorentino, R., & Gabriele, A. (2012). The processing of number and gender
agreement in Spanish: An event-related potential investigation of the effects of structural
distance. Brain Research, 1456, 49-63. DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2012.03.057
Bader, M., & Meng, M. (1999). Subject-object ambiguities in German embedded clauses: An
across-the-board comparison. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 28(2), 121-143. DOI:
10.1023/A:1023206208142
Barber, H., & Carreiras, M. (2005). Grammatical gender and number agreement in
Spanish: An ERP comparison. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 17(1), 137-153. DOI:
10.1162/0898929052880101
Battistella, E. (1990). Markedness: The evaluative superstructure of language. Albany, NY: SUNY
Press.
Bruhn de Garavito, J. (2003). Learners' competence may be more accurate than we think:
Spanish L2 and agreement morphology. In J. M. Liceras, H. Zobl, & H. Goodluck (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 6th Generative Approaches to Second Language Acquisition Conference
(pp. 17-23). Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.
Bruhn de Garavito, J., & White, L. (2002). The L2 acquisition of Spanish DPs: The status of grammatical features. In A. T. Perez-Leroux, & J. M. Liceras (Eds.), The acquisition of Spanish
morphosyntax: The L1/L2 connection (pp. 153-178). Dordrecht: Kluwer. DOI: 10.1007/97894-010-0291-2_6
Carstens, V. (2000). Concord in minimalist theory. Linguistic Inquiry, 31(2), 319-355. DOI:
10.1162/002438900554370
Cowper, E. (2005). The geometry of interpretable features: Infl in English and Spanish. Language,
81(1), 10-46. DOI: 10.1353/lan.2005.0012
Franceschina, F. (2005). Fossilized second language grammars: The acquisition of grammatical
gender. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. DOI: 10.1075/lald.38
Foucart, A., & Frenck-Mestre, C. (2012). Can late L2 learners acquire new grammatical features?
Evidence from ERPs and eye-tracking. Journal of Memory and Language, 66(1), 226-248.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jml.2011.07.007
Gabriele, A., Fiorentino, R., & Aleman Banon, J. (2013). Examining second language development using event-related potentials: A cross-sectional study on the processing of gender and number agreement. Linguistic Approaches to Bilingualism, 3(2), 213-232. DOI:
10.1075/lab.3.2.04gab
Gillon-Dowens, M., Vergara, M., Barber, H. A., & Carreiras, M. (2010). Morphosyntactic processing in late second-language learners. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 22(8), 1870-
1887. DOI: 10.1162/jocn.2009.21304
Halle, M., & Marantz, A. (1993). Distributed morphology and the pieces of inflection. In K.
Hale, & S. J. Keyser (Eds.), The view from building 20: Essays in linguistics in honor of Sylvain
Bromberger (pp. 111-176). Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
Harley, H. (1994). Hug a tree: Deriving the morphosyntactic feature hierarchy. In A. Carnie,
& H. Harley (Eds.), MITWPL 21: Papers on phonology and morphology (pp. 275-288).
Cambridge, MA: MITWPL.
Harley, H., & Noyer, R. (1999). Distributed morphology. Glot International, 4(4), 3-9.

218 Beatriz Lopez Prego and Alison Gabriele
Harley, H., & Ritter, E. (2002). Structuring the bundle: A universal morphosyntactic feature geometry. In H. Simon, & H. Wiese (Eds.), Pronouns: Features and representation (pp. 23-39).
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Hawkins, R. (2001). The theoretical significance of Universal Grammar in second language acquisition. Second Language Research, 17(4), 345-367. DOI: 10.1191/026765801681495868
Hawkins, R., & Casillas, G. (2008). Explaining frequency of verb morphology in early L2 speech.
Lingua, 118(4), 595-612. DOI: 10.1016/j.lingua.2007.01.009
Hawkins, R., & Chan, C. Y -H. (1997). The partial availability of universal grammar in second
language acquisition: The `failed functional features hypothesis'. Second Language Research,
13(3), 187-226. DOI: 10.1191/026765897671476153
Haznedar, B., & Schwartz, B. D. (1997). Are there optional infinitives in child L2 acquisition?
In E. Hughes, M. Hughes, & A. Greenhill (Eds.), Proceedings of the 21st Annual Boston
University Conference on Language Development (pp. 257-268). Somerville, MA: Cascadilla
Press.
Hopp, H. (2010). Ultimate attainment in L2 inflection: Performance similarities between nonnative and native speakers. Lingua, 120(4), 901-931. DOI: 10.1016/j.lingua.2009.06.004
Keating, G. D. (2009). Sensitivity to violations of gender agreement in native and nonnative Spanish: An eye-movement investigation. Language Learning, 59(3), 503-535. DOI:
10.1111/j.1467-9922.2009.00516.x
Lardiere, D. (1998a). Case and tense in the `fossilized' steady state. Second Language Research,
14(1), 1-26. DOI: 10.1191/026765898674105303
Lardiere, D. (1998b). Dissociating syntax from morphology in a divergent end-state grammar.
Second Language Research, 14(4), 359-375. DOI: 10.1191/026765898674105303
Lardiere, D. (2000). Mapping features to forms in second language acquisition. In J. Archibald
(Ed.), Second language acquisition and linguistic theory (pp. 102-129). Oxford: Blackwell.
Lardiere, D. (2009). Some thoughts on the contrastive analysis of features in second language
acquisition. Second Language Research, 25(2), 173-227.
McCarthy, C. (2007). Morphological variability in second language Spanish. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, McGill University, Montreal, Canada.
McCarthy, C. (2008). Morphological variability in the comprehension of agreement: An argument for representation over computation. Second Language Research, 24(4), 459-486.
DOI: 10.1177/0267658308095737
McCarthy, C. (2012). Modeling morphological variation and development: Person and number in L2 Spanish. Linguistic Approaches to Bilingualism, 2(1), 25-53. DOI: 10.1075/
lab.2.1.02mcc
McDonald, J. L. (2006). Beyond the critical period: Processing-based explanations for poor
grammaticality judgment performance by late second language learners. Journal of Memory
and Language, 55(3), 381-401. DOI: 10.1016/j.jml.2006.06.006
Meng, M., & Bader, M. (2000). Ungrammaticality detection and garden-path strength:
Evidence for serial parsing. Language and Cognitive Processes, 15(6), 615-666. DOI:
10.1080/016909600750040580
Montrul, S. (2005). Second language acquisition and first language loss in adult early bilinguals:
Exploring some differences and similarities. Second Language Research, 21(3), 199-249.
DOI: 10.1191/0267658305sr247oa
Montrul, S., Foote R., & Perpinan, S. (2008). Gender agreement in adult second language learners and Spanish heritage speakers: The effects of age and context of acquisition. Language
Learning, 58(3), 503-553. DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-9922.2008.00449.x

Examining the impact of task demands on morphological variability in Spanish 219
Picallo, M. C. (1991). Nominals and nominalizations in Catalan. Probus, 3(3), 279-316. DOI:
10.1515/prbs.1991.3.3.279
Prevost, P., & White, L. (2000). Missing surface inflection or impairment in second language acquisition? Evidence from tense and agreement. Second Language Research, 16(2), 110-133.
Renaud, C. (2010). On the nature of agreement in English-French acquisition: A processing investigation in the verbal and nominal domains. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Indiana
University.
Renaud, C. (2011). Processing gender: The case of pronouns and adjectives in L2 French. In J.
Herschensohn, & D. Tanner (Eds.), Proceedings of the 11th Generative Approaches to Second
Language Acquisition Conference (pp. 121-134). Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.
Renaud, C. (2012). An investigation of the role of gender in the resolution of pronouns in French.
In A. K. Biller, E. Y. Chung, & A. E. Kimball (Eds.), Proceedings of the 36th Boston University
Conference on Language Development (pp. 512-524). Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.
Ritter, E. (1993). Where is gender? Linguistic Inquiry, 24(4), 795-803.
Sato, M. (2007). Sensitivity to syntactic and semantic information in second language sentence
processing. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Essex, Colchester, United
Kingdom.
Schlesewsky, M., & Frisch, S. (2003). Nominative case as a multidimensional default. In S.
Fischer, R. van de Vijver, & R. Vogel (Eds.), Experimental studies in linguistics 1 (pp. 61-72).
Potsdam, Germany: University of Potsdam.
Sebastian-Galles, N., Marti-Antonin, M. A., Carreiras-Valina, M. F., & Cuetos-Vega, F. (2000).
LEXESP: Lexico informatizado del espanol. Barcelona: Edicions Universitat de Barcelona.
Schwartz, B. D., & Sprouse, R. (1996). L2 cognitive states and the full transfer/full access model.
Second Language Research, 12(1), 40-72. DOI: 10.1177/026765839601200103
Tagliaferri, B. (2005). Paradigm [Computer software]. Perception Research Systems, Inc.
Available from www.perceptionresearchsystems.com
Teschner, R. V., & Russell, W. M. (1984). The gender patterns of Spanish nouns: An inverse
dictionary-based analysis. Hispanic Linguistics, 1(1), 115-132.
Tsimpli, I., & Dimitrakopoulou, M. (2007). The interpretability hypothesis: Evidence from whinterrogatives in second language acquisition. Second Language Research, 23(2), 215-242.
DOI: 10.1177/0267658307076546
Vogel, R., & Frisch, S. (2003). The resolution of case conflicts: A pilot study. In S. Fischer, R. van
de Vijver, & R. Vogel (Eds.), Experimental studies in linguistics 1 (pp. 91-103). Potsdam,
Germany: University of Potsdam.
Wagers, M., & McElree, B. (2011). Memory for linguistic features: Evidence from the dynamics of
agreement. Retrieved on 14 August 2013 from University of California Santa Cruz, Matt
Wagers Web site: http://people.ucsc.edu/~mwagers/work.shtml
Wagers, M., Lau, E., Stroud, C., McElree, B., & Phillips, C. (2009). Encoding syntactic predictions: Evidence from the dynamics of agreement. Paper presented at the CUNY Sentence
Processing Conference 22, Davis, CA.
White, L., Valenzuela, E., Kozlowska-Macgregor, M., & Leung, Y.-K. I. (2004). Gender and
number agreement in nonnative Spanish. Applied Psycholinguistics, 25(1), 105-133. DOI:
10.1017/S0142716404001067

220 Beatriz Lopez Prego and Alison Gabriele

Appendix A. Mean acceptance rates (%) for the two types of agreement
violations for gender and number
Table 1. L2 Speeded GJT
Group

Gender default

Gender f. clash

Number default

Number f. clash

Mean

SD

Mean

SD

Mean

SD

Mean

SD

Low

57.41

26.60

56.71

24.79

47.92

47.92

46.07

46.07

Int.

47.53

22.73

54.01

26.39

34.57

34.57

21.61

19.88

Adv.

18.52

19.62

28.40

23.33

13.89

19.27

7.72

10.29

Table 2. L2 Untimed GJT
Group

Gender default

Gender f. clash

Number default

Number f. clash

Mean

SD

Mean

SD

Mean

SD

Mean

SD

Low

38.89

28.71

37.35

27.86

31.48

27.94

24.69

34.94

Int.

20.37

18.09

25.46

26.74

7.41

11.44

3.70

6.42

Adv.

4.94

12.91

8.33

15.27

2.47

7.91

1.24

3.05

Table 3. Native Speeded GJT
Group

Gender default

Gender f. clash

Number default

Number f. clash

Mean

Mean

Mean

Mean

SD

SD

SD

SD

Speed 1

6.02

3.71

5.56

4.74

7.87

9.01

5.09

5.53

Speed 2

12.04

8.96

12.19

11.10

16.82

11.99

8.95

9.60

Speed 3

20.37

15.49

17.13

15.40

25.15

18.80

18.98

18.99

Appendix B. Mean reaction times (in z-scores) for the two types of
agreement violations for gender and number
Table 1. L2 Speeded GJT
Group

Gender default

Gender f. clash

Number default

Number f. clash

Mean

SD

Mean

SD

Mean

SD

Mean

SD

Low

-.34

.18

-.25

.19

-.25

.25

-.28

.25

Int.

-.11

.19

-.18

.16

-.32

.21

-.36

.18

Adv.

-.31

.22

-.17

.26

-.44

.21

-.53

.18

Examining the impact of task demands on morphological variability in Spanish 221

Table 2. Native Speeded GJT
Group

Gender default

Gender f. clash

Number default

Number f. clash

Mean

SD

Mean

SD

Mean

SD

Mean

SD

Speed 1

-.38

.17

-.29

.07

-.36

.22

-.37

.14

Speed 2

-.36

.17

-.34

.16

-.30

.19

-.37

.23

Speed 3

-.30

.21

-.33

.16

-.29

.21

-.27

.18

Appendix C. Mean acceptance rates (%) for the grammatical conditions
Table 1. L2 Speeded GJT
Group

Gram. Fem.Pl.

Gram. Fem.Sg.

Gram. M.Pl.

Gram. M.Sg.

Low

80.56

75.93

70.37

68.06

Int.

83.95

90.12

80.25

77.78

Adv.

93.83

93.21

95.06

92.59

Table 2. L2 Untimed GJT
Group

Gram. Fem.Pl.

Gram. Fem.Sg.

Gram. M.Pl.

Gram. M.Sg.

Low

80.25

80.86

80.86

81.48

Int.

90.74

90.74

92.60

88.89

Adv.

94.44

88.27

91.36

90.74

Gram. Fem.Sg.

Gram. M.Pl.

Gram. M.Sg.

Table 3. Native Speeded GJT
Group

Gram. Fem.Pl.

Speed 1

93.52

94.44

96.30

94.44

Speed 2

81.17

83.03

86.42

79.63

Speed 3

84.26

80.86

81.48

78.70

Authors' addresses
Beatriz Lopez Prego
University of Kansas
Department of Linguistics
Blake Hall, Room 427, 1541 Lilac Lane
Lawrence, KS 66045-3129
USA

Alison Gabriele
University of Kansas
Department of Linguistics
Blake Hall, Room 427, 1541 Lilac Lane
Lawrence, KS 66045-3129
USA

lopezb@ku.edu

gabriele@ku.edu

