Applied Psycholinguistics 24 (2003), 431-451
Printed in the United States of America
DOI: 10.1017.S0142716403000225

Linguistic distance and initial
reading acquisition: The case
of Arabic diglossia
ELINOR SAIEGH-HADDAD
Bar-Ilan University
ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE
Elinor Saiegh-Haddad, English Department, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan 52900, Israel.
E-mail: saieghe@mail.biu.ac.il
ABSTRACT
The study examined phonemic awareness and pseudoword decoding in kindergarten and first grade
Arabic native children. Because native speakers of Arabic first learn to read in Modern Standard
Arabic (MSA), a language structurally distinct from the local form of the language they grow up
speaking, it was hypothesized that the linguistic differences between the two varieties, the so-called
diglossic variables, would interfere with the acquisition of basic reading processes in MSA. Two
diglossic variables were examined: phoneme and word syllabic structure. The children's phoneme
isolation and pseudoword decoding skills were tested. The results showed that both diglossic variables interfered with the children's performance of both tasks in both grades. The findings support
the role of linguistic distance in the acquisition of basic reading processes in a diglossic context.

A growing body of research has helped anchor the hypothesis that reading acquisition is grafted onto oral language skills. This assumption, however, did not
characterize either theory making or reading practice in the field until fairly
recently. Until the beginning of the 1980s it was still believed that a major
determinant of individual differences in reading performance was the ability of
readers to use linguistic redundancy and sentence context for word guessing
(Goodman, 1965, 1968, 1976; Smith, 1971, 1973, 1975). Later contradictory
evidence showed, however, that when using reading materials of comparable
difficulty, skilled and less-skilled readers, matched on word decoding, are
equally efficient in their use of context (Becker, 1985; Briggs, Austin, & Underwood, 1984; Perfetti, 1985; Perfetti, Goldman, & Hogaboam, 1979; Pring &
Snowling, 1986; Simpson & Foster, 1986; West & Stanovich, 1978). Once word
decoding came to be realized as the primary determinant of individual variations
in reading achievement, researchers began to inquire about the underlying skills
that predicted word decoding. It was this question that gave impetus to recent
concerns about the role of oral language in the acquisition of basic reading
processes.
 2003 Cambridge University Press 0142-7164/03 $12.00

Applied Psycholinguistics 24:3
Saiegh-Haddad: Linguistic distance and reading

432

The simple view of reading (Gough & Tunmer, 1986; Gough, Hoover, &
Peterson, 1996; Hoover & Gough, 1990) epitomizes this trend in reading theory.
This model of reading places a strong emphasis on the role of oral and aural
linguistic comprehension skills in the development of reading in the child's first
language. Further, it uses these skills, along with word decoding, to account for
individual variations in reading achievement. According to the simple view,
reading is the product of two skills: decoding and linguistic comprehension, or
listening comprehension skills (R = D x C). The model also stipulates that phonological recoding, or grapheme-phoneme conversion, is the primary mechanism
for word decoding. Thus, the model is grounded in the assumption that, by the
time they commence reading in their native language, children have already
acquired the necessary oral and aural linguistic skills in this language upon
which to graft reading. It also assumes that these skills are utilized by beginning
readers at both the word decoding and the discourse comprehension levels. The
question that looms large, then, relates to the nature of reading acquisition in
the absence of such prerequisite skills. In other words, how do beginning readers
develop reading in a context where reading is first learned in a language that is
structurally distinct from the oral language they have already acquired, as is the
case with Arabic-native children learning to read in Modern Standard Arabic
(MSA)? Do linguistic differences between the two varieties of the language, the
local vernacular and the written standard, obstruct the development of basic
reading processes? The present study is an attempt to address these questions.
LINGUISTIC AND SOCIOLINGUISTIC ISSUES
IN ARABIC READING ACQUISITION

The Arabic language was the example that Ferguson (1959) used when he first
introduced the term diglossia to describe a situation where two varieties of the
same language are used for socially distinct functions. In particular, the term
refers to "the presence of a high and a low style or standard in a language, one
for formal use in writing and some speech situations and one for colloquial use"
(Harris & Hodges, 1981, p. 88). MSA, also known as Literary Arabic or Classical Arabic, is used as a language of wider communication throughout the Arabic-speaking world for high functions, including writing, speeches, and religious
sermons (Ferguson, 1959). This variety alternates with colloquial varieties,
which are most notably used for everyday conversation. MSA is first encountered at school and can be viewed almost as a second language (Ayari, 1996;
Ibrahim, 1977). Outside school, Arabic native children's oral exposure to MSA
is confined to documentary and educational TV programs, news broadcasts,
and only some children's programs. As a result of this rigid sociofunctional
complementarity or compartmentalization (Hudson, 1991), the oral linguistic
knowledge of MSA that children bring to reading, both at the level of the word
and at the level of discourse, is severely curtailed.
Diglossia is associated with another complication. The use of two varieties of
Arabic for mutually exclusive sets of functions has meant that the two forms
have become distant and subsequently distinct. The linguistic distance between
MSA and the local spoken vernaculars is illustrated by a variety of diglossic

Applied Psycholinguistics 24:3
Saiegh-Haddad: Linguistic distance and reading

433

variables (cf. Walters, 1994), or linguistic structures that survived in MSA but
disappeared from colloquial Arabic. These variables include, but are not restricted to
1. important lexical differences, even in commonplace everyday words and functional terms;
2. inflections denoting gender, number, and tense, most of which have disappeared from all the colloquial Arabic dialects; and
3. important varying changes in structure with sounds in writing, which have
dropped out of everyday usage (Maamouri, 1998, pp. 47-48).

To illustrate some of the manifestations of the linguistic distance between
MSA and the various Arabic vernaculars, it is informative at this point to consider some specific examples. MSA and colloquial Arabic are characterized by
different phonological systems with overlapping, although not identical, phonemic inventories and with different phonotactic constraints on the phonological
composition of syllables. For instance, whereas the phonemic inventory of MSA
includes voiced /U/ and voiceless // interdental fricatives, like the first phonemes of the English words then and thin, respectively, these phonemes are
absent from some of the spoken varieties of Arabic. In these varieties, when
MSA words are also shared by the local vernacular, they are phonologically
altered or pronounced differently with standard MSA phonemes replaced by
other phonemes that are within the specific spoken variety. For instance, in a
local form of Northern Palestinian Arabic, which is spoken in the north of Israel,
the word /Uakar/ (male) is pronounced /dakar/. Similarly, the word /qali:l/ (few)
is pronounced /Gali:l/. Another phonological difference between MSA and the
Arabic spoken vernaculars relates to the phonological composition of the syllable. For instance, whereas word initial consonant clusters are not permissible in
MSA, they are quite frequent in colloquial Arabic. Thus, the MSA word /tura:b/
(soil) becomes /tra:b/ in colloquial Arabic. At the same time, although word
final consonant clusters are rare in spoken Arabic, they are among the most
frequent monosyllabic word structures in MSA. Thus, an MSA word like /sahl/
(plain) becomes /sahel/ when used in colloquial Arabic. Similarly, the MSA
words /qalb/ (heart) and /alz/ (snow) become /Galeb/ and /talez/, respectively,
with both the MSA initial phoneme and consonant cluster rime coda altered in
adjustment to the phonological system of the specific local vernacular.
At the syntactic and morphosyntactic levels, MSA sentences follow the verb,
subject, object (VSO) word order, as in example 1 below. In addition, with its
dense morphological structure of words embodying inflectional morphemes that
mark person, number, gender, case, and tense, colloquial Arabic typically follows a strict SVO word order, as in example 2, with most of these inflectional
morphemes dropped.
1.
2.

Gakal-a lwalad-u
tuffaha-tan
(he ate) (the boy-nominative) (an apple-accusative)
lwalad Gakal
tuffaha
(the boy) (ate)
(an apple)

Applied Psycholinguistics 24:3
Saiegh-Haddad: Linguistic distance and reading

434

At the level of the lexicon, although only some lexical items are shared by
MSA and colloquial Arabic, these shared items are characterized by variable
degrees of relatedness between the two forms that ranges from identical phonological representations in both varieties, as in the words /zanu:b/ (south) or
/zamal/ (a camel), to a phonological distance that can be as small as a single
inflectional vocalic alteration, as in /same!a/ versus /seme!/ (he heard), or as
big as an alteration of both the phonemic and the syllabic structures of the word,
as in /qalb/ versus /Galeb/ (a heart). In addition to the lexical items that are
shared by the two forms, the majority of words are in complementary distribution. These items need to be learned in the process of becoming literate in the
standard form of the language.
Despite the complex diglossic nature of Arabic illustrated above and the contention that this linguistic duality might be related to some of the hardships
that native Arabic beginning readers encounter (Ayari, 1996; Ibrahim, 1983;
Maamouri, 1998), this phenomenon has not yet attracted sufficient empirical
attention. Among the few studies that addressed the role of diglossia in initial
reading development, Feitelson, Goldstein, Iraqi, and Share (1993) tested the
possible causal link between reading to children and the development of literary
language learning. They found that listening to stories in literary Arabic was
effective in familiarizing children with literary language; listening to stories
even extended beyond the children's comprehension skills into their active use
of language. Abu-Rabia (2000) compared the reading comprehension performance of first and second grade children, who had been experimentally exposed
to literary Arabic throughout their preschool period, with the reading performance of a parallel control group. He found that the early exposure of Arab
preschool children to literary Arabic enhanced their performance on reading
comprehension tests 2 years later.
Despite their merit in demonstrating a possible causal link between exposure
to literary Arabic and top-level comprehension skill development, these studies
do not address the bottom-level linguistic facet of the interface between the two,
an issue vital for a theory of initial reading acquisition in diglossic and bidialectal settings. Thus, at least three broad questions remain unanswered: (a) do diglossic variables, or linguistic distance parameters, interfere with the acquisition
of basic reading processes in MSA? (b) Which diglossic structures (phonological, syntactic, morphosyntactic, or lexical) interfere with the acquisition of basic
reading skills? (c) Which reading skills (phonemic awareness, word decoding,
reading fluency, or reading comprehension) are sensitive to diglossic variables?
The current study is an attempt to begin to address some aspects of these questions.
It focuses on two diglossic variables from the domain of phonology, phonemic
and word syllabic structure variables, and studies their effect on the acquisition of
two key basic reading processes: phonemic awareness and pseudoword decoding.
ORAL LANGUAGE SKILLS AND THE ACQUISITION OF BASIC
READING PROCESSES IN AN ALPHABETIC LANGUAGE

One of the roles that current reading theory attributes to the oral language derives from the assumption that word decoding is predicated on a phonological

Applied Psycholinguistics 24:3
Saiegh-Haddad: Linguistic distance and reading

435

recoding mode, or a grapheme-phoneme conversion mechanism. Therefore, it
is assumed that an awareness of the phonological structure of words is a prerequisite to the acquisition of word reading, at least in an alphabetic language. This
hypothesis has been widely researched and amply documented by studying a
series of phonological sensitivity skills, which range from basic, naturally developing rhyming abilities to contrived phonemic deletion and reversal skills. The
evidence that these studies produced converged in showing a positive significant
role of phonological sensitivity in predicting beginning reading achievement (for
reviews, see Adams, 1990; Goswami & Bryant, 1990). Moreover, it has been
demonstrated that phonological awareness is sensitive to at least two factors:
the size of the linguistic unit and the linguistic context. As to the former, syllables were found to be easier to access and analyze than single phonemes (Liberman & Shankweiler, 1977; Liberman, Shankweiler, Fischer, & Carter, 1974;
Treiman & Zukowsky, 1991). Rimes (nucleus and coda) are easier to analyze
than either nucleus or coda separately (Kirtley, Bryant, Maclean, & Bradley,
1989; Treiman, 1985, 1988, 1992). Single-phoneme onsets are easier than complex, consonantal cluster onsets (Bruck & Treiman, 1990; Treiman & Weatherson, 1992). As to the effect of the linguistic context, isolating initial sounds in
shorter monosyllabic words was found to be easier than performing the same
task in longer bisyllabic words (Treiman & Weatherson, 1992); initial phonemes
are easier to analyze than final phonemes (Stanovich, Cunningham, & Cramer,
1984; Treiman, 1991; Treiman & Zukowsky, 1991); and stressed units are easier
to analyze than unstressed units (Treiman & Weatherson, 1992).
Given that alphabetic orthographies, with varying degrees of depth (Liberman, Liberman, Mattingly, & Shankweiler, 1980), are made up of graphemes
that map onto phonemes, it is reasonable to assume that children's oral language
experience impacts on their phonological sensitivity and decoding skills. What
is not as clear, however, is how the specific oral language experience affects
the development of various reading processes. Further, what is the nature of the
development of initial reading skills in different linguistic contexts with variable
characteristics concerning the relationship between the oral and the written language? To address some of these fundamental issues, recent research has taken
a crosslinguistic perspective and has studied the nature of the process in other
languages besides English. It was hypothesized that because phonological sensitivity captured the ability to reflect on and manipulate phonological structures,
crosslinguistic variations in phonological properties, and representations, the way
the orthography is used to map phonological structures should affect the process
and outcome of phonological analysis. This trend focused on two linguistic units:
the phoneme and the syllable. It examined whether the availability of specific
phonemes and the relative frequency of some syllabic structures in the oral language affected the ability of monolingual and bilingual children to process these
units. The pertinent evidence that this research has helped accumulate confirms
the role of the oral language experience in the development of basic reading
skills and supports a crosslinguistic transfer of oral language properties and
structures in initial reading acquisition (for a review, see Geva & Wang, 2001).
This evidence comes from a variety of languages, including, but not restricted
to, English (Treiman, Berch, & Weatherson, 1993; Treiman & Weatherson,

Applied Psycholinguistics 24:3
Saiegh-Haddad: Linguistic distance and reading

436

1992), French (Sprenger-Charolles & Siegel, 1997), Spanish (Jimenez Gonzalez & Haro Garcia, 1995; Jimenez Gonzalez & Ortiz, 1993), Italian (Cossu,
Shankweiler, Liberman, Katz, & Tola, 1988), Hebrew (Wade-Woolley & Geva,
2000), Turkish (Durgunoglu & Oney, 1999; Oney & Goldman, 1984), and
Dutch (Schreuder & van Bon, 1989). For example, Wade-Woolley and Geva
(2000), examined the sensitivity of bilingual English-Hebrew children to the
phonemic contrast /ts/ versus /s/, which occurs productively in Hebrew but is
phonotactically constrained in English. They found that bilingual English-
Hebrew subjects had difficulty discriminating between the two sounds, especially in onset positions. Also, sensitivity to this contrast was related to word
reading ability in both Hebrew and English. This finding led to the conclusion
that "phonological elements specific to the second-language present additional
challenges to beginning readers" (p. 295).
Research into the availability of a larger phonological unit, the syllable, is
more widespread. Sprenger-Charolles and Siegel (1997), for instance, tested the
effect of syllabic structure on the development of reading (and spelling) skills
in French. Among the predictions in this study was that the frequency of open
syllables in French should result in superior performance on consonant-vowel
(CV) and CCV syllables, in contrast to CVC syllables, and that the stability of
vowels in French should lead to fewer errors involving vowels. The findings of
the study largely corroborated the predictions and confirmed the importance of
phonological mediation in the initial stages of reading acquisition.
The current study examines the relevance of the oral language experience to
initial reading acquisition in diglossic Arabic. The context of Arabic reading
acquisition is unique because native Arabic children first learn to read in MSA,
which is structurally different from the language they grow up speaking. These
differences, which in nondiglossic languages are modest and are obtained in the
domains of vocabulary and syntax, are much greater in diglossic languages and
extend to the domains of phonology and morphosyntax. Given that reading is
grafted onto oral language skills, it is reasonable to hypothesize that linguistic
differences between the two forms of Arabic would interfere with the development of basic reading skills in MSA. For instance, differences in the word order
of spoken versus written sentences and in the morphosyntactic structure of
words in the two forms, in addition to the big lexical and phonological gap
between the two varieties and the distinct formal representations of even shared
lexical items, are expected to obstruct the children's phonemic awareness of
standard MSA structures. These differences are also expected to interfere with
children's ability to recognize these structures in their written form, their ability
to achieve fluency or automaticity in the recognition of these structures, and, ultimately, their reading comprehension. The present study restricts itself to just two
manifestations of the linguistic distance between the written and the spoken forms
of Arabic from the domain of phonology--phonemic and syllabic structure--and
studies their effect on the acquisition of two key reading processes--phonemic
awareness and word decoding. It addresses the following research questions:
1. What is the effect of phonological distance between spoken and standard Arabic on the children's phonemic awareness in MSA, in particular, on

Applied Psycholinguistics 24:3
Saiegh-Haddad: Linguistic distance and reading

437

a. children's ability to isolate MSA phonemes?
b. children's ability to isolate phonemes from MSA syllabic structures?
2. What is the effect of phonological distance between spoken and standard Arabic on children's pseudoword decoding accuracy in MSA, in particular, on
a. children's ability to decode MSA phonemes?
b. children's ability to decode MSA syllabic structures?

METHOD

The children's phonemic awareness and decoding of MSA structures as a function of the status of the phonological structure was studied. Because in a typical
diglossic situation the phonological structures, such as phonemes and syllabic
structures, are not all within the spoken vernacular of children, a given phonological structure can have either of two types of status: both standard and spoken, thus, being familiar to the child from his/her oral experience (hereafter
spoken); or standard only, therefore unavailable to the beginning reader from
his/her spoken vernacular (hereafter termed standard). Given the strong evidential basis for the relevance of the oral language experience in the initial stages
of reading acquisition, it is hypothesized that the status of the phonological
structure will interfere with the development of basic reading processes in the
written form. In other words, phonemes that are only standard and not within
the spoken vernacular of children will be harder to isolate and decode than those
phonemes that are within their spoken form of the language. By the same token,
word syllabic structures that are only standard and not part of the oral experience of children will be harder to analyze. In an additive manner, a standard
phoneme that is embedded in a standard syllabic structure is expected to prove
even harder.
Because the standard syllabic structure that the study addresses consists of a
consonantal cluster rime coda, the children's phonemic awareness and decoding
of both initial and final phonemes is studied. It is predicted that, in accordance
with the evidence obtained from English and some other European languages
(Stanovich et al., 1984; Treiman, 1991; Treiman & Zukowsky, 1991), Arabic
native children will find initial onset phonemes easier to analyze than final rime
coda phonemes, irrespective of the status of phoneme. In addition, it is expected
that, in line with previous evidence (Bruck & Treiman, 1990; Treiman & Weatherson, 1992), children will find phoneme isolation from a consonantal cluster
rime coda even harder to perform. This is expected to prove especially so in the
present study because the CVCC structure that the study addresses is only standard and not available to children from their spoken vernacular.
Participants

A total of 65 students (23 kindergarten, 42 first grade) from a local public school
at an Arab village in the north of Israel participated in the study. Participants
were of average socioeconomic background and were all native speakers of the
same local form of the Northern Palestinian Arabic vernacular spoken in the

Applied Psycholinguistics 24:3
Saiegh-Haddad: Linguistic distance and reading

438

north of Israel. Although a total of 84 children was initially sampled, the actual
number of participants dropped to 65 because children speaking a different local
variety (because they had only recently moved to the village) were excluded.
Also excluded from the initial sample were children who could not articulate
the standard structures, phonemes in particular, that the study addressed. Out of
the 42 first grade children taking the phonemic awareness tasks, 10 students
were not administered the pseudoword decoding task due to timing and schoolrelated administrative problems. This left 32 first graders in the pseudoword
decoding analysis. The mean age of children in the kindergarten group was
71.26 months (SD = 3.26), whereas the mean age of the children at the first
grade level was 83.66 months (SD = 3.77).
At the school that was sampled, as is the case in all Arab schools across
the country, instruction is performed through the medium of the local spoken
vernacular; standard Arabic is only introduced in the beginning of the first grade
as a school subject, and focus is placed primarily on the development of reading
skills. Even though literacy is one of the components that the Ministry of Education recommends that teachers should introduce at the senior kindergarten level,
these recommendations are not generally followed. At least this was the case in
the kindergarten grades that we studied, where no systematic instruction in phonemic awareness, letter, or word recognition was provided. At the first grade
level, reading instruction does not follow the phonics method, nor does it entail
systematic instruction in phonemic awareness. Oral and written syllabification
is the primary method used to help children process the multisyllabic structure
of Arabic words. Reading instruction at the initial stages combines letter recognition with special emphasis on the ability to write the three, and sometimes
four, different shapes of each letter (initial, middle, and end of the word), in
addition to reading using short simple texts.
Materials
Phonemic awareness tasks. Two phonemic awareness tasks were developed:
initial phoneme isolation (40 items) and final phoneme isolation (40 items). All
items in both tasks were three or four letter pseudowords that manipulated the
status of the target phoneme and the status of the stimulus syllabic structure.
Thus, target phonemes, both initial and final, had either of two types of status:
standard (i.e., used only in MSA and therefore not within the spoken vernacular
of children) or spoken (and thus familiar to the children from their oral language
experience). The standard phonemes that the study addressed included all consonantal MSA standard phonemes that do not exist in the participants' spoken
vernacular and are distributed evenly between initial and final phoneme isolation
tasks. These included both voiced and voiceless interdental fricatives, /U/ and
// (the first phonemes in the English words then and thin, respectively), voiced
emphatic interdental fricative /Uw /, and voiceless uvular stop /q/. The spoken
phonemes were a random sample of the consonantal phonemes that exist in the
spoken vernacular of children and included both obstruents (stops and fricatives)
and sonorant consonantal phonemes (nasals and liquids).

Applied Psycholinguistics 24:3
Saiegh-Haddad: Linguistic distance and reading

439

The syllabic structure of pseudoword stimuli also had either of two types
of status: a monosyllabic CVCC structure, which is a standard structure used
exclusively in MSA, or a bisyllabic CVCVC structure, which is a very frequent
word structure in both spoken and standard Arabic. Half of the bisyllabic stimuli
had primary stress on the first syllable, whereas the other half had primary stress
on the second syllable.
Thus, items in both initial and final phoneme isolation tasks were (randomly
ordered) pseudowords that can be classified into four categories (see Appendix
A), 10 items in each category (standard phonemes appear in boldface):
1.
2.
3.
4.

syllabic structure spoken, target phoneme spoken (e.g., /sali:b/ and /tw a:lem/);
syllabic structure spoken, target phoneme standard (e.g., /ami:l/ and /a:meq/);
syllabic structure standard, target phoneme spoken (e.g., /zafn/ and /fasl/; and
syllabic structure standard, target phoneme standard (e.g., /qar/ and /mar/).

Decoding task. A pseudoword decoding task consisting of 40 items was devel-

oped. The items were derived from the phonological sensitivity tasks, 20 items
from the initial phoneme isolation task (5 items from each category) and 20
items from the final phoneme isolation task (5 items from each category). The
items were classifiable in the same manner described above. All decoding items
were presented in the fully vowelized orthographic form (see Appendix B).
Procedure
Phonemic awareness. The administration of all tasks took place during May

2001. The phonemic awareness tasks were administered to both kindergarten
and first grade children. The order of the administration of the initial phoneme
isolation and the final phoneme isolation tasks was counterbalanced. The same
child was administered all phonemic awareness tasks on the same day. Children
were asked to listen carefully to the words that were presented separately using
an audiotape; they were asked to vocalize each of the words out loud, then they
were required to isolate the target phoneme. This procedure was followed in
order to guarantee that the children's inability to isolate the phoneme was not
confounded by pronunciation problems. Those children who could not pronounce the target structures were not tested. Two illustration trials using pseudowords of familiar phonemes and syllabic structures were administered to familiarize children with the task. The subjects' responses were recorded and also
noted on a test paper that was only used by the examiner in order to validate
the initially categorized responses. Each student received two phonemic awareness scores that corresponded to the number of correct responses that s/he
achieved on each of the two tasks: initial phoneme isolation and final phoneme
isolation. In addition, four subscores within each task were produced that corresponded to the number of correct responses within each of the stimulus categories addressed. One score was assigned for successfully isolating the target phoneme from the stimulus item, and a zero score was given for providing a wrong
phoneme(s) or for providing the correct phoneme in a CV syllabic unit.

440

Applied Psycholinguistics 24:3
Saiegh-Haddad: Linguistic distance and reading

Table 1. Descriptive statistics for phoneme isolation performance as a
function of phoneme status, syllable status, and position among kindergarten
children (N = 23)
Phoneme Status
Spoken
(Max. = 10)
Syllable Status
Spoken
M
SD
Standard
M
SD
Total
M
SD

Standard
(Max. = 10)

Total

Initial

Final

Initial

Final

Initial

Final

6.52
3.47

7.91
2.82

5.00
3.17

5.86
2.97

11.52
6.42

13.78
4.59

5.65
3.88

6.60
3.47

4.08
3.38

6.17
3.45

9.73
6.36

12.78
6.20

12.17
6.89

14.52
6.09

9.08
6.28

12.04
5.65

21.26
12.12

26.56
10.32

Decoding task. In addition to phonological sensitivity, first grade students were

administered a pseudoword decoding task on the following day. Students were
asked to read the list of pseudowords at their own pace. The subjects' decoding
performance was recorded and responses were transcribed. Three types of decoding errors were recorded: (a) target phoneme decoding error, such as substituting a spoken phoneme for a standard MSA phoneme (e.g., /karb/ for /qarb/);
(b) syllabic-structure decoding error, such as inserting a vowel in the standard
CVCC rime coda word structure, a process known as epenthesis, thus rendering
a spoken and more regular CVCVC word syllabic-structure (e.g., /fanid/ for
/fand/); and (c) other types of errors, including nontarget phoneme decoding
errors, such as vowel lengthening or shortening. First grade subjects received
three pseudoword decoding error scores that corresponded to the number of
errors of each type that they had made. An error score was assigned for failing
to decode the target structure (phoneme or syllabic structure), and a zero score
was given for successfully performing this task. The same item could yield more
than one type of decoding error.
RESULTS
Phonological sensitivity

The subjects' performance on the phonemic awareness tasks was not found to
be normally distributed. Therefore, nonparametric measures were initially used
to trace the effect of status of phonological structure, grade, and position on
performance. Having achieved similar results, we hereby present a detailed description of the analysis obtained from the parametric tests.
Table 1 and Table 2 provide summary statistics, including marginal means,

441

Applied Psycholinguistics 24:3
Saiegh-Haddad: Linguistic distance and reading

Table 2. Descriptive statistics for phoneme isolation performance
as a function of phoneme status, syllable status, and position among
first grade children (N = 42)
Phoneme status
Spoken
(Max. = 10)
Syllable Status
Spoken
M
SD
Standard
M
SD
Total
M
SD

Standard
(Max. = 10)

Total

Initial

Final

Initial

Final

Initial

Final

8.02
3.23

9.04
2.17

7.26
3.02

8.83
1.36

15.28
6.08

17.88
2.70

7.85
3.62

8.85
2.07

7.00
3.78

8.42
2.14

14.85
7.01

17.28
3.08

15.88
6.62

17.90
2.92

14.26
6.57

17.26
3.10

30.14
12.85

35.16
4.27

of the performance of kindergarten and first grade children on the two phonemic
awareness tasks (initial and final phoneme isolation) by the status of the phoneme and word syllabic structure (standard vs. spoken).
The effect of status of phoneme and word syllabic structure on phoneme
isolation performance was examined using split plot analysis of variance
(ANOVA) with repeated measures on status of phoneme and syllabic structure.
In addition, position of the target phoneme (initial vs. final), was included in
the analysis. Thus, the number of correct responses on the phonemic awareness
tasks were analyzed using a 2 x 2 x 2 x 2 split plot ANOVA with grade (kindergarten vs. first grade) as a between subjects factor and with repeated measures
on status of phoneme (standard vs. spoken), status of syllabic structure (standard
vs. spoken), and phoneme position (initial vs. final). This analysis revealed a
main effect of the status of the phoneme, F (1, 63) = 17.76, p < .001, with
standard phonemes proving significantly harder to isolate than those phonemes
that are within the spoken vernacular of children. The interaction of the status
of the phoneme by grade was only marginally significant, F (1, 63) = 3.16, p =
.08, and there was a trend for standard phoneme isolation to be more challenging
for kindergarten children. The status of syllabic structure was not found to have
a main effect on phoneme isolation, F (1, 63) = 2.53, p = .11. However, the
interaction of the status of the syllabic structure by the status of the phoneme
by phoneme position was significant, F (1, 63) = 9.21, p < .001, with initial
phoneme isolation proving especially difficult when both the target phoneme
and the syllabic structure in which the phoneme was embedded were standard
and not within the oral experience of children. The interaction of the status of
syllabic structure by the status of phoneme by the position by grade was also
significant, with initial standard phoneme isolation from standard syllabic structures proving especially challenging for kindergarten children, F (1, 63) = 10.60,

442

Applied Psycholinguistics 24:3
Saiegh-Haddad: Linguistic distance and reading

Table 3. Percentage of first graders decoding errors
(N = 32) by target phonological structure
Decoding Error Score
Phonological Structure
Standard phoneme
Standard syllable
Other

M

SD

10.51
22.34
30.85

25.20
26.94
34.34

p < .001. The analysis also revealed a significant effect of grade as a between
subjects factor, F (1, 63) = 10.90, p < .001, with first grade subjects outperforming kindergarteners, and a main effect of position, F (1, 63) = 6.96, p <
.01, with initial phoneme isolation scores lower than final phoneme isolation
scores across phonemes and syllabic structures. The interaction of the status of
the syllabic structure by the status of the phoneme and the interaction of the
status of the syllabic structure by grade were not significant (p > .5).
Decoding errors

It was initially planned to analyze the decoding errors of first grade children in
the same way as the phonemic awareness scores using an ANOVA with repeated measures on the status of the phonological structure. However, the distribution of the decoding errors, with cells with constant means of zero when the
phonological structure, both phoneme and syllabic structure, was within the spoken vernacular of children, did not allow the use of this test. Table 3 provides
descriptive statistics for the decoding errors that students made on standard phonemes, standard syllabic structures, and the other error category. Scores were
converted to a percentage out of the maximum number of errors.
The single-sample t test was used to analyze standard phoneme decoding
errors and standard syllabic structure errors. This analysis showed that the status
of the target phoneme--spoken (M = 0, SD = 0) versus standard (M = 10.51,
SD = 25.20)--significantly affected standard phoneme decoding error scores,
t (31) = 2.35, p < .001. Similarly, the status of syllabic structure--spoken (M =
0, SD = 0) versus standard (M = 22.34, SD = 26.94)--significantly affected the
standard syllabic structure decoding error scores, t (31) = 4.69, p < .001. Next,
the paired-sample t test was used to compare standard phoneme versus standard
syllabic structure decoding errors. This analysis showed that subjects made a
significantly greater number of standard syllable decoding errors than standard
phoneme decoding errors, t (31) = 1.74, p < .05. Finally, the status of the syllable structure was not found to have a significant effect on standard phoneme
decoding errors nor on initial versus final phoneme position.
The relationship between the children's ability to isolate phonemes and their
ability to phonologically recode them in a pseudoword decoding task was next
examined. This analysis showed that, whereas initial phoneme isolation did not
correlate with any of the decoding error types, final phoneme isolation and

Applied Psycholinguistics 24:3
Saiegh-Haddad: Linguistic distance and reading

443

standard phoneme decoding errors were significantly correlated, r (32) = -.36,
p < .05. An even stronger correlation was found between final standard phoneme
isolation and standard phoneme decoding, r (32) = -.54, p < .001.
DISCUSSION

The objective of the study was to examine the effect of the linguistic distance
between MSA and a local Arabic vernacular on the acquisition of basic reading
processes in MSA. To address this question, kindergarten and first grade children were examined for their performance on phonemic awareness tasks that
manipulated the status of the syllabic structure of pseudoword stimuli and the
status of target phonemes. This examination showed that the standard versus
spoken status of the phoneme interfered with the ability of children, at both
grade levels, to isolate that phoneme from both initial and final positions. A
trend was also revealed for standard phoneme isolation to be harder for kindergarteners than for first grade children. The results also showed that when the
phoneme was standard and embedded in a standard word syllabic structure,
initial phoneme isolation was even harder, and particularly so for kindergarten
children. It is important to point out in this respect that the only marginally
significant interaction of phoneme status by grade could be related to the sampling procedure that excluded those children who could not articulate the target
MSA structures. It is possible that this procedure restricted the sample being
tested to children with relatively higher levels of exposure and experience with
MSA. It is interesting, however, that even among these children, the status of
phonological structure was found to have a main effect on phoneme isolation in
both grades. Further research, using methods of data collection that do not require production of phonological structures, may consolidate the present findings and reveal an even greater effect of phoneme status on phoneme isolation
and a larger difference between the two grades in the ability to isolate standard
phonemes.
The finding that the availability of some phonemes and word syllabic structures in the oral language of children remains significant in explaining phoneme
isolation performance in MSA, even at the end of the first grade, has serious
implications for the importance of characteristics of the specific oral language
and of the distance between the oral and the written language on the development of phonemic awareness in the written form. The results also have serious
ramifications for the cross-dialectal validity of phonological sensitivity tasks in
MSA, and they imply that a thorough analysis of the linguistic distance between
the specific spoken variety of candidates and MSA is warranted before any such
task is designed. Finally, the present findings encourage further examinations of
the impact of other diglossic variables on the acquisition of basic reading processes in MSA.
Although the status of phonological structure was found to impact on the
phoneme isolation performance of both kindergarteners and first graders, the
latter were found to significantly outperform the former on all tasks. This implies that, though first grade children seemed to have benefited from the increased exposure and experience with MSA structures that formal literacy in-

Applied Psycholinguistics 24:3
Saiegh-Haddad: Linguistic distance and reading

444

struction allows, they were still facing particular difficulty when confronted with
the task of isolating standard phonological structures. This finding demonstrates
one of the unique complexities present in learning to read in MSA. Whereas in
other linguistic contexts, beginning readers come to the reading task with sufficient knowledge and experience with the phonological structures that they are
taught to decode, Arabic native children are required to simultaneously master
the oral representation of a set of diglossic structures that are not available to
them from their oral language experience and to discover how these structures
are mapped onto the specific orthography. The present results show this task to
remain a serious challenge for children even at the end of the first grade.
A second unique characteristic of Arabic is demonstrated in the finding that
initial phonemes were consistently harder to isolate than final phonemes. This
finding, while at odds with the evidence obtained from English, is believed to
shed some light on the structure of the Arabic syllable and the basic phonological unit that Arabic native children are capable of handling at the initial stages
of literacy acquisition. The evidence obtained from English and some other
European languages reveals a consistent pattern for initial onset phonemes to be
easier to manipulate than final rime coda phonemes (Stanovich et al., 1984;
Treiman, 1991; Treiman & Zukowsky, 1991) and for the analysis of consonantal
clusters to be particularly difficult (Bruck & Treiman, 1990; Treiman & Weatherson, 1992). This evidence demonstrates the psychological reality of the internal onset (C)-rime (VC) structure of the English syllable (Kirtley et al., 1989;
Treiman, 1985, 1988, 1992). The present study addressed two syllabic structures: a spoken bisyllabic CVCVC structure and a standard CVCC structure.
The results showed that initial phoneme isolation, which required subjects to
isolate the first prevocalic phoneme from the CV unit (a syllable in the case of
CVCVC, but a subsyllabic unit in the case of CVCC) was consistently harder
than final postvocalic phoneme isolation in both structures. This suggests that
the task of breaking down the CV syllabic structure in Arabic, even though it is
the most frequent syllabic structure in the language (Ababneh, 2000), and isolating the prevocalic consonant (ClV) is more challenging than isolating any postvocalic consonant (VC2), even from a complex consonantal cluster (VC3). This
is especially true for kindergarteners. These findings imply a closer link between
the initial consonant and the nucleus vowel than between the vowel and any
postvocalic consonant, thus casting doubt on the universality of the onset-rime
(C-VC) dichotomy and questioning the validity of this intrasyllabic structure
in Semitic languages. Nonetheless, the validity of this suggestion against the
applicability of the onset-rime notion in Arabic remains tentative until further
evidence, using larger samples and a wider range of syllabic and subsyllabic
units, is produced.1
As to the effect of the status of syllabic structure on phoneme isolation, the
results showed that standard syllabic structures interfered with the isolation of
standard prevocalic initial phonemes, but not with standard postvocalic final
phonemes. In addition, kindergarteners were not found to have greater difficulty
with standard syllabic structures than first grade children. Given that word syllabic structure is standard and not available to children from their spoken vernacular, this finding is mystifying and suggests the possibility that children in

Applied Psycholinguistics 24:3
Saiegh-Haddad: Linguistic distance and reading

445

both grades were neutralizing the effect of the status of syllabic structure by
possibly inserting a vowel between the last two consonants. By inserting a
vowel and turning the structure into a regular CVCVC, children were simplifying the structure of the syllable and facilitating the task of final phoneme isolation. Only introspective methods of data collection can help shed light on the
processes underlying phonological analysis.
The decoding performance of first grade children also revealed particular interference from the status of phonological structure, with standard syllabic structures leading to more decoding errors than standard phonemes. Contrary to standard structures, phonemes and syllabic structures that are available in the spoken
vernacular of children were almost perfectly decoded. In other words, even
though first grade children appeared to be highly accurate at decoding spoken
structures, they found particular difficulty when the phonological structure they
were required to decode was not within their spoken vernacular. Given the shallow orthography in which the pseudoword decoding stimuli were presented and
the ability of the sampled children to articulate the phonological structures being
addressed, the high decoding accuracy of spoken structures among first graders
is not surprising and accords with the high decoding accuracy rates reported by
same age children in other shallow orthographies like Dutch (Bast & Reitsma,
1998). It further shows that in the shallow orthography of Arabic, in particular,
where knowledge of individual grapheme-phoneme relationships may be the
primary skill underlying word decoding, distant standard structures constitute a
major source of decoding inaccuracy.2
Finally, the results showed that phoneme isolation, and especially standard
phoneme isolation, was correlated with standard phoneme decoding. However,
this was only true for the relatively easier final phoneme isolation task. In other
words, those children who were shown to have difficulty isolating standard phonemes from final postvocalic positions also had trouble decoding these phonemes. On the other hand, their success or failure at isolating standard phonemes
from initial prevocalic positions was not correlated with their ability to decode
these phonemes. These findings suggest a variable component structure of the
skills that underlie initial and final phoneme isolation, on the one hand, and
phoneme decoding, on the other. In other words, the results provide primary
indication that, in Arabic, the skills that underlie final phoneme isolation may
share more with phoneme decoding than the skills underlying initial phoneme
isolation. Given that initial phoneme isolation was more difficult to perform and
more susceptible to linguistic distance parameters, these findings lend further
support to the proposed unique structure of the Arabic syllable.
In summary, the results of the study confirm the hypothesis that the linguistic
distance between MSA and spoken Arabic interferes with the acquisition of
basic reading processes in MSA. The study addressed two diglossic structures,
the phoneme and the syllabic structure, and showed that MSA standard phonemes are more difficult to isolate than those phonemes that also exist in the
children's vernacular, even at the end of the first grade. The syllable was also
found to interfere with phoneme isolation, but only when the phoneme was
standard and embedded in initial prevocalic position. This implies that phoneme
isolation is not an all or none skill, and that in addition to the effect of the

Applied Psycholinguistics 24:3
Saiegh-Haddad: Linguistic distance and reading

446

linguistic context already established in the literature (Stanovich et al., 1984;
Treiman, 1991; Treiman & Zukowsky, 1991), the status of the phoneme, or its
relative distance from the oral experience of children, is related to differential
phoneme isolation performance. The study also showed that diglossia and the
subsequent phonological distance between the two varieties of Arabic is related
to the decoding ability of young Arabic native children.
One question that looms large from the present findings relates to the specific
point in the literacy acquisition process when the effect of the linguistic distance
between the two forms is reconciled or minimized. Because children acquire
and maintain literacy, the effect of the phonological distance on the acquisition
of basic reading processes is expected to wane as exposure and experience with
the written form increases. At what exact point this happens and what the consequences of not achieving it in the appropriate time line might be are questions
for future research to explore.
APPENDIX A
INITIAL AND FINAL PHONEME ISOLATION ITEMS CLASSIFIED BY
STIMULUS CATEGORY
Syllable structure spoken, target phoneme spoken
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.

Initial
xabaz
a:be!
da:ker
sakam
tw a:mez
saham
za:rem
malat
zahal
ra:bedw

Final
!afal
sa:ref
fa:!er
zana:s
sutu:n
ha:fe
mage:d
sa:dex
abe:b
rana:z

Syllable structure spoken, target phoneme standard
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.

Initial
amal
abal
a:met
Uamal
Uahan
Ua:her
Uw a:hel
Uw aban
qa:fen
qatw am

Final
na:be
xane:
ha:me
mare:U
!a:neU
tara:U
!a:meUw
~ame:Uw
sa:neq
dale:q

Applied Psycholinguistics 24:3
Saiegh-Haddad: Linguistic distance and reading

Syllable structure standard, target phoneme spoken
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.

Initial
sabt
makn
dabr
dw ahl
sa!m
kard
zabn
falk
rahb
land

Final
arb
sand
ma!t
dafl
za!r
mars
wa!z
tw ar
sank
balf

Syllable structure standard, target phoneme standard
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.

Initial
arb
amn
ard
Uabl
Uarb
Uazl
Uw ayn
Uw amr
qatw m
qar

Final
nam
bar
kart
harU
namU
barU
ma!Uw
tw arUw
balq
samq

APPENDIX B
PSEUDOWORD DECODING ITEMS CLASSIFIED
BY STIMULUS CATEGORY
Syllable structure spoken, target phoneme spoken
Initial
1. xabaz
2. a:be!
3. da:ker
4. sakam
5. tw a:mez

Final
!afal
sa:ref
fa:!er
zana:s
sutu:n

Syllable structure spoken, target phoneme standard
Initial
1. amal
2. abal

Final
na:be
xane:

447

Applied Psycholinguistics 24:3
Saiegh-Haddad: Linguistic distance and reading

3. Uamal
4. Uw a:hel
5. qaam

448

mare:U
!a:meUw
dale:q

Syllable structure standard, target phoneme spoken
Initial
1. sabt
2. makn
3. dabr
4. dw ahl
5. sa!m

Final
arb
sand
ma!t
dafl
za!r

Syllable structure standard, target phoneme standard
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Initial
arb
amn
Uazl
Uw ayn
qar

Final
nam
bar
bar U
ma!Uw
samq

APPENDIX C
INDEX TO PHONEMIC TRANSCRIPTION
Symbol
:

U
Uw
s

tw
dw
x
~
q
G
h
!

Description
long vowel
voiceless interdental fricative, as in the beginning of thin
voiced interdental fricative as in the beginning of then
emphatic voiced interdental fricative
voiceless alveopalatal fricative, as in the beginning of shine
emphatic voiceless dental fricative
emphatic voiceless dental stop
emphatic voiced dental stop
voiceless uvular fricative
voiced uvular fricative
uvular stop
glottal stop
voiceless pharyngeal fricative
voiced pharyngeal fricative

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author wishes to thank Joel Walters and Jonathan Fine, Bar-Ilan University, for their
assistance in designing the study, and Esther Geva, OISE, University of Toronto, for her

Applied Psycholinguistics 24:3
Saiegh-Haddad: Linguistic distance and reading

449

feedback on an earlier version of the paper. Many thanks also go to the Editor and the
reviewers for their helpful comments on a previous version of the manuscript. The study
was sponsored by a postdoctoral grant from the Ministry of Science, Israel.

NOTES
1. The stress pattern was not related to the ability of children to isolate initial and final
phonemes. Comparing the phoneme isolation performance of children on the two
types of bisyllabic stimuli, those that had stress on the first syllable and those that
had stress on the second syllable, did not reveal a significant difference.
2. Note that the particular difficulty that first grade children showed in decoding the
distant CVCC syllablic structure could be related to a general difficulty in processing
consonantal clusters, rather than to the status of the structure, a pattern strongly
established in the English reading and spelling literature (Bruck & Treiman, 1990;
Treiman & Weatherson, 1992). It was not possible to test this possibility in the
present study because of the lack of a parallel structure in the children's spoken
language.

REFERENCES
Ababneh, Y. (2000). Studies in the linguistics and phonology of Arabic. Aman, Jordan: Dar-El
Shorook.
Abu-Rabia, S. (2000). Effects of exposure to literary Arabic on reading comprehension in a diglossic
situation. Reading and Writing: An Interdisciplinary Journal, 13, 147-157.
Adams, M. (1990). Beginining to Read: Thinking and learning about print. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Ayari, S. (1996). Diglossia and illiteracy in the Arab world. Language, Culture and Curriculum, 9,
243-252.
Bast, J. W., & Reitsma, P. (1998). Analyzing the development of individual differences in terms of
Mathew effects in reading: Results from a Dutch longitudinal study. Developmental Psychology, 34, 1373-1399.
Becker, C. A. (1985). What do we really know about semantic context effects during reading? In
D. Besner, T. Waller, & G. MacKinnon (Eds.), Reading Research: Advances in theory and
practice (Vol. 5, pp. 125-166). New York: Academic Press.
Briggs, P., Austin, S., & Underwood, G. (1984). The effects of sentence in good and poor readers: A
test of Stanovich interactive-compensatory model. Reading Research Quarterly, 20, 54-61.
Bruck, M., & Treiman, R. (1990). Phonological awareness and spelling in normal children and
dyslexics: The case of initial consonant clusters. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology,
50, 156-178.
Cossu, G., Shankweiler, D., Liberman, I. Y., Katz, L., & Tola, G. (1988). Awareness of phonological segments and reading ability in Italian children. Applied Psycholinguistics, 9, 1-16.
Durgunoglu, A. Y., & Oney, B. (1999). A cross-linguistic comparison of phonological awareness
and word recognition. Reading and Writing: An Interdisciplinary Journal, 11, 281-299.
Feitelson, D., Goldstein, Z., Iraqi, J., & Share, D. L. (1993). Effects of listening to story reading
on aspects of literacy acquisition in a diglossic situation. Reading Research Quarterly, 28,
71-79.
Ferguson, C. A. (1959). Diglossia. Word, 14, 47-56.
Geva, E., & Wang, M. (2001). The development of basic reading skills in children: A cross-language
perspective. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 21, 182-203.
Goodman, K. S. (1965). A linguistic study of the cues and miscues in reading. Elementary English,
42, 639-643.
Goodman, K. S. (1968). The psycholinguistic nature of the reading process. In K. S. Goodman
(Ed.), The psycholinguistic nature of the reading process (pp. 13-26). Detroit, MI: Wayne
State University Press.

Applied Psycholinguistics 24:3
Saiegh-Haddad: Linguistic distance and reading

450

Goodman, K. S. (1976). Reading: A psycholinguistic guessing game. In H. Singer & R. B. Rudell
(Eds.), Theoretical models and processes of reading (pp. 497-508). Newark, DE: International Reading Association.
Goswami, U., & Bryant, P. (1990). Phonological skills and learning to read. Hove, UK: Erlbaum.
Gough, P. B., & Tunmer, W. E. (1986). Decoding, reading, and reading disability. Remedial and
Special Education, 7, 6-10.
Gough, P. B., Hoover, W. A., & Peterson, C. L. (1996). Some observations on a simple view of
reading. In C. Cornoldi & J. Oakhill (Eds.), Reading comprehension difficulties (pp. 1-13).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Harris, T. L., & Hodges, R. E. (1981). A dictionary of reading and related terms. Newark, DE:
International Reading Association.
Hoover, W. A., & Gough, P. B. (1990). The simple view of reading. Reading and Writing: An
Interdisciplinary Journal, 2, 127-160.
Hudson, A. (1991). Toward the systematic study of diglossia. Southwest Journal of Linguistics, 7,
5-15.
Ibrahim, M. H. (1977). Diglossia and foreign language teaching. International Review of Applied
Linguistics, 15, 154-163.
Ibrahim, M. H. (1983). Linguistic distance and literacy in Arabic. Journal of Pragmatics, 7, 507-
515.
Jimenez Gonzalez, J. E., & Haro Garcia, C. R. (1995). Effects of word linguistic properties on phonological awareness in Spanish children. Journal of Educational Psychology, 87, 193-201.
Jimenez Gonzalez, J., & Ortiz, M. (1993). Phonological awareness in learning literacy. Cognitiva,
5, 153-170.
Kirtley, C., Bryant, P., Maclean, M., & Bradley, L. (1989). Rhyme, rime, and the onset of reading.
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 48, 224-245.
Liberman, I., Liberman, A. M., Mattingly, I., & Shankweiler, D. (1980). Orthography and the beginning reader. In R. L. Venezky & J. F. Kavanagh (Eds.), Orthography, reading, and dyslexia
(pp. 137-153). Baltimore, MD: University Park Press.
Liberman, I., & Shankweiler, D. (1977). Speech, the alphabet and teaching to read. In L. B. Resnick & P. A. Weaver (Eds.), Theory and practice of early reading (pp. 105-129). Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Liberman, I., Shankweiler, D., Fischer, F., & Carter, B. (1974). Explicit syllable and phoneme
segmentation in the young child. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 18, 201-212.
Maamouri, M. (1998). Language education and human development: Arabic diglossia and its impact on the quality of education in the Arab region. Discussion paper prepared for The
World Bank, The Mediterranean Development Forum.
Oney, B., & Goldman, S. (1984). Decoding and comprehension skills in Turkish and English: Effects of the regularity of grapheme-phoneme correspondences. Journal of Educational Psychology, 76, 557-568.
Perfetti, C. A. (1985). Reading Ability. New York: Oxford University Press.
Perfetti, C. A., Goldman, S. R., & Hogaboam, T. W. (1979). Reading skill and the identification of
words in discourse context. Memory and Cognition, 7, 273-282.
Pring, L., & Snowling, M. (1986). Developmental changes in word recognition: An informationprocessing account. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 38A, 395-418.
Schreuder, R., & van Bon, W. H. J. (1989). Phonemic analysis: effects of word properties. Journal
of Research in Reading, 12, 59-78.
Simpson, G. B., & Foster, M. R. (1986). Lexical ambiguity and children's word recognition. Developmental Psychology, 22, 147-154.
Smith, F. (1971). Understanding reading. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Smith, F. (1973). Psycholinguistics and reading. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Smith, F. (1975). The role of prediction in reading. Elementary English, 52, 305-311.
Sprenger-Charolles, L., & Siegel, L. S. (1997). A longitudinal study of the effects of syllabic
structure on the development of reading and spelling skills in French. Applied Psycholinguistics, 18, 485-505.
Stanovich, K. E., Cunningham, A. E., & Cramer, B. B. (1984). Assessing phonological awareness
in kindergarten children: Issues of task comparability. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 38, 175-190.

Applied Psycholinguistics 24:3
Saiegh-Haddad: Linguistic distance and reading

451

Treiman, R. (1985). Onset and rimes as units of spoken syllables: Evidence from children. Journal
of Experimental Child Psychology, 39, 161-181.
Treiman, R. (1988). The internal structure of the syllable. In G. Carlson & M. Tanenhaus (Eds.),
Linguistic structure in language processing, (pp. 27-52). Norwell, MA: Kluwer Academic.
Treiman, R. (1991). Phonological awareness and learning to read and spell. In D. J. Sawyer &
B. J. Fox (Eds.), Phonological awareness and reading: The evolution of current perspectives
(pp. 159-189). New York: Springer-Verlag.
Treiman, R. (1992). The role of intrasyllabic units in learning to read and spell. In P. B. Gough,
L. C. Ehri, & R. Treiman (Eds.), Reading acquisition (pp. 65-106). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Treiman, R., Berch, D., & Weatherson, S. (1993). Children's use of phoneme-grapheme correspondences in spelling: Roles of position and stress. Journal of Educational Psychology, 85,
466-477.
Treiman, R., & Weatherson, S. (1992). Effects of linguistic structure on children's ability to isolate
initial consonants. Journal of Educational Psychology, 84, 174-201.
Treiman, R., & Zukowsky, A. (1991). Levels of phonological awareness. In S. A. Badry & D. P.
Shankweiler (Eds.), Phonological processes in literacy: A tribute to Isabelle Y. Liberman
(pp. 67-83). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Wade-Woolley, L., & Geva, E. (2000). Processing novel phonemic contrasts in the acquisition of
L2 word reading. Scientific Studies of Reading, 4, 295-311.
Walters, K. (1994). Diglossia, linguistic variation, and language change in Arabic. In M. Eid (Ed.),
Perspectives on Arabic Linguistics VIII (pp. 157-197). Amsterdam: Benjamins.
West, R. F., & Stanovich, K. E. (1978). Automatic contextual facilitation in readers of three ages.
Child Development, 49, 717-727.

