C 2003 Cambridge University Press DOI: 10.1017/S1366728903001019
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition 6 (1), 2003, 17-31 

Cross-linguistic transfer in
deverbal compounds of
preschool bilingual children

17

E L E NA N I C O L A D I S
University of Alberta

Cross-linguistic transfer can be explained by structural ambiguity in a bilingual child's two languages (Dopke, 1998; Hulk
and Muller, 2000). This study examined the effect of morphological ambiguity in transfer of deverbal compounds in English
and French. English-speaking children go through a stage of producing ungrammatical verb-object compounds in their
acquisition of object-verb-er compounds. In French, verb-object compounds are productive. If structural ambiguity predicts
when transfer occurs, French-English bilingual children should use more ungrammatical verb-object compounds than
English-speaking children and more grammatical verb-object compounds than French-speaking children. This study focused
on 36 French-English bilingual children's production and comprehension of novel deverbal compounds in both languages.
The results supported these predictions for production but not for comprehension. It is concluded that cross-linguistic transfer
is a language production phenomenon and that structural ambiguity can predict when morphological transfer can occur.

While bilingual children can clearly differentiate their
two languages early in development (see Nicoladis and
Genesee, 1997, for a review of the literature), they
commonly show evidence of the influence of one language
on the other. For example, Gawlitzek-Maiwald, and Tracy
(1996) demonstrated that a German-English bilingual
child showed an advantage in age of acquisition of
some aspects of English syntax relative to monolingual
children. They argued that the child's syntax was bolstered
by the earlier-learned German constructions. These results
demonstrated that early bilingualism can sometimes
facilitate language acquisition. In this paper, I use the
term (cross-linguistic) transfer to refer to the structural
influence of one language on another (see Meisel, 1983),
regardless of whether the influence facilitates language
acquisition or not.
In recent years, researchers have started to focus
their attention on explanations of how and why crosslinguistic transfer occurs in child language acquisition. Of
particular importance is the fact that researchers working
in two different theoretical frameworks have identified
the possibility that structural ambiguity in two languages
may explain when cross-linguistic transfer occurs (Dopke,
1998; Muller, 1998; see also Hulk and Muller, 2000). Hulk
and Muller (2000; see also Muller, 1998) have argued
that transfer occurs when structures are ambiguous at
the interface between syntax and other cognitive systems
such as pragmatics. Two languages can be said to have
ambiguous structures when a structure is allowed in both
languages and a different structure is also allowed in at
least one of the languages. For example, Hulk and Muller
(2000) examined the spontaneous productions of a Dutch-

French bilingual child and a German-Italian bilingual
child. They showed that the children dropped more
objects in the Romance language than in the Germanic
language, as would be expected if children misanalysed
the Romance language as allowing object drop. Hulk
and Muller's (2000) hypothesis also predicts that there
should be no cross-linguistic transfer when structures
are not ambiguous between languages (i.e., when two
languages employ different structures). Hulk and Muller
(2000) showed that this was the case for bilingual children's use of root infinitives. The rate of root infinitive
use of bilingual children fell within the range of that of
monolingual children. The authors argued that the reason
transfer occurs for object drop and not root infinitives is
that there is structural ambiguity for object drop but not
for root infinitives from the children's perspective (see
Hulk and Muller, 2000, for further details).
In a similar vein but from a different theoretical
perspective, Dopke (1998) has argued that transfer
occurs when children receive ambiguous cues from their
two languages, basing her hypothesis on Bates and
MacWhinney's (1989) competition model. According to
this model, children adjust their understanding of ordering
according to probabilities in their language(s). Therefore,
the ordering of phrases in one language can affect the
ordering of phrases in another, but only if that language
allows both orders. In many instances, Dopke's (1998)
hypothesis makes the same predictions as Hulk and
Muller's (2000) for when transfer should occur. That
is, transfer should occur when a particular structure is
allowed in both of a bilingual's languages as well as
another option in at least one language and should not

Address for correspondence
University of Alberta, Department of Psychology, P-217 Biological Sciences Building, Edmonton, AB, T6G 2E9 Canada.
E-mail: elenan@ualberta.ca

18

Elena Nicoladis

occur when the structures differ by language. Dopke
found evidence of transfer from English verb-phrase
ordering into German verb phrases for three GermanEnglish bilingual children.
It is of particular importance for the purposes of
this study that both Dopke (1998) and Hulk and Muller
(2000) have pointed out that, in terms of cross-linguistic
transfer, bilingual children generally make the same KINDS
of error as monolingual children make in acquisition.
However, the errors might be made with greater (or
lesser) FREQUENCY. Furthermore, both approaches have
stressed that structural ambiguity must be defined from
children's perspective rather than on the basis of what
adults do with the languages. That is, if children allow a
structure that adults think is ungrammatical and this ungrammatical structure overlaps with a structure from the
children's other language, we should see cross-linguistic
transfer.
Structural ambiguity can explain many documented
signs of cross-linguistic transfer in child language acquisition, such as the placement of object clitics in French
(Hulk, 1997), word order in subordinate clauses in
German (Muller, 1998) and prosodic transfer in FrenchEnglish bilingual children (Paradis, 2001). It can also
explain when transfer is not seen in bilingual children, as
in pronoun use, verb finiteness and placement of negative
markers relative to the verb in French and English (Paradis
and Genesee, 1996), and use of root infinitives in a FrenchDutch bilingual child and an Italian-German bilingual
child (Hulk and Muller, 2000).
Structural ambiguity cannot explain the fact that
cross-linguistic transfer has been observed in the nounnoun compounds of French-English bilingual children
(Nicoladis, 1999, 2002). Noun-noun compounds are leftheaded in French and right-headed in English. Because
the order within compounds differs systematically by
language, according to the structural ambiguity hypothesis, there should be no transfer of one language on
the other in children's formation of compounds. However,
Nicoladis (2002) showed that three- and four-year-old
French-English bilingual children misordered novel nounnoun compounds significantly more often than English
monolingual children and at the same rate in both
languages. She further pointed out that her results could
not be explained in terms of frequency of compounds (they
are highly frequent in English and infrequent in French)
or the vocabulary size of the children.
One possible explanation for why the compound
ordering results differ from those in syntax and phonology
is that morphology is acquired differently than syntax.
In describing languages, many linguists have argued
that it is important to maintain a split between syntax
and morphology (e.g., Selkirk, 1982). However, some
researchers have argued that the processes of acquiring
morphology and syntax might be similar for children (as

implied in, for example, Clark and Barron, 1988; see also
Bates and MacWhinney, 1989).
The purpose of the present study is to see if there
is cross-linguistic transfer with ambiguous morphology.
I briefly summarize the logic of the study here and
then turn to expanding on the background of the study.
In acquiring deverbal compounds of the form objectverb-er (e.g., anteater), English-speaking children reportedly go through a phase where they form ungrammatical
compounds of the form verb-object (e.g., wash-bottle
to refer to a tool for washing bottles; Clark, Hecht,
and Mulford, 1986). Verb-object compounds are
grammatical in French (e.g., lave-vaisselle `wash-dishes'
means `dishwasher'). Because English-speaking children
allow verb-object compounds, French-English bilingual
children should find the ordering of deverbal compounds
ambiguous. If children are sensitive to ambiguous
morphology, the following pattern of cross-linguistic
transfer should be observed. French-English bilingual
children should produce more ungrammatical verbobject compounds in English than monolingual Englishspeaking children. In contrast, their French productions
of verb-object compounds should be advanced, relative to
those of monolingual French-speaking children. Before
spelling out those predictions as relevant to the present
study, I briefly describe English and French deverbal
compounds and review the literature on the acquisition
of these compounds in both English and French.
Deverbal compounds in English and French
English object-verb-er (hereafter OV-er) compounds can
refer both to people (e.g., brick layer, bookbinder,
bus driver) and instruments (e.g., can opener, tape
player, cup holder). These are endocentric compounds,
with the rightmost word (i.e., V-er) being the head of
the compound (Fabb, 1998). It is possible that OV-er
compounds reverse the usual phrasal ordering in English
because the compounds preserve an older English phrasal
ordering (Baker, 1998). There are a few exocentric verbobject compounds in English (e.g., pickpocket and daredevil). Most of these compounds entered the English
language in the 16th century from Old French and tend
to have a derogatory connotation when applied to people
(Marchand, 1960). Verb-object compounds are no longer
productive as nominals in the dialect of English spoken
by the children in this study.
In French, exocentric verb-object (hereafter VO)
compounds are used prototypically to refer to instruments,
with the concept of instruments being broadly defined.
For example, taille-crayon `sharpen-pencil' means `pencil
sharpener', attrape-mouches `catch-flies' means `flypaper', and porte-voix `carry-voice' means `megaphone'.
Many chemical products are also referred to by VO compounds, like chasse-moustiques `chase-mosquitoes' for

Transfer in deverbal compounds
`mosquito repellent', estompe-rides `fade-wrinkles' for
`wrinkle cream', and lave-vitres `wash-windows' for
`window cleaning liquid'. Less frequently, VO compounds can refer to events, like remue-menage
`stir-household' meaning `commotion', attrape-nigaud
`catch-simpleton' meaning `con game' or casse-croute
`break-crust' meaning `snack'. In Canada casse-croute
also refers to a snack bar. Rarely, VO compounds refer
to people, as in casse-pieds `break-feet' referring to an
annoying person, tranche-montagne `slice-mountain' for
`someone who tells exaggerated stories', porte-parole
`carry-word' means `spokesperson' and garde-chasse
`guard-hunting' means `gamekeeper'. French is not
usually considered a compounding language, favouring
derivational means, usually suffixes, for word creation
(Clark, 1998).
At this point, there is no agreement and, in fact,
little discussion as to the processes that might underlie
the creation or processing of deverbal compounds. The
description and classification of compounds has usually
focused on the lexical categories that can combine to
form compounds and, to a lesser extent, the grammatical
roles of the words relative to each other within a
compound (e.g., Quirk, Greenbaum, Leech and Svartvik,
1985; Fabb, 1998). To the extent that researchers have
considered how compounds might be created in the
minds of speakers, many have implied that the creation
of novel deverbal compounds, at least in English, has
something to do with speakers' conceptualization of verb
phrases or phrasal ordering (Selkirk, 1982; Clark et al.,
1986; Baker, 1998). However, most researchers have also
argued that any description of compounds should be at
the morphological level and not the syntactic level (see
Selkirk, 1982). Some recent research has pointed to the
possibility that speakers do not make the connection
between verb phrases and deverbal compounds. Instead,
they may process deverbal compounds by analogy with
other complex lexical items (for example, football player
might be related in speakers' minds to player piano,
playground, playing field). One study (Nicoladis and
Murphy, 2002) compared British and Canadian children's
acquisition of OV-er compounds. British English allows
verb-noun compounds (like answer-phone or push-chair)
slightly more often than Canadian English while the
phrasal ordering of the two dialects is the same. If children
attended to the ordering of phrases in acquisition, there
should be no differences between children's acquisition
of compounds. In fact, the study showed that the British
children formed significantly fewer OV-er compounds
than the Canadian children and significantly more
ungrammatical VO compounds. The authors argue that
these results are obtained because there is a more varied
set of complex lexical items to influence British Englishspeaking children's compound production. In any case,
as it is not yet clear how best to describe deverbal

19

compounds, the present results may help clarify what
kinds of processes children use in creating them.
Acquisition of deverbal compounds in English
and French
The following review focuses on children's acquisition of
deverbal compounds. There is, therefore, little discussion
of children's acquisition of other kinds of compounds,
such as noun-noun compounds (see Clark, Gelman
and Lane, 1985; Berman and Clark, 1989; Nicoladis,
2002, for research on children's acquisition of nounnoun compounds in English, Hebrew and French), except
where such research sheds light on children's acquisition
of deverbal compounds. Children's acquisition of
compounds has been thought to be related to a number
of factors, including frequency and/or productivity in the
input, phrasal ordering and children's vocabulary size.
I next discuss each of these factors relative to children's
acquisition of deverbal compounds in English and French.
Languages differ in how frequently compounds are
used to create novel lexical items, a fact that may be
related to ease and/or age of acquisition. Germanic languages frequently use compounding while Romance
languages tend toward derivation for lexical creations
(Clahsen, 1995; Clark, 1998). Low productivity may lead
to late acquisition. For example, one reason for Hebrewspeaking children's late acquisition of compound nouns
may be low frequency in spoken input (Clark and Berman,
1987; Berman and Clark, 1989). Similarly, high frequency
in the input may explain English-speaking children's
early acquisition of noun-noun compounds (Clark, 1981;
Clark et al., 1985). English OV-er compounds are
relatively infrequent compared to noun-noun compounds
like bookshelf in language directed to children; in one
study, OV-er compounds accounted for only 5% of the
compounds that two- and three-year-old children heard
(Nicoladis and Yin, 2002). And, it is only late in the
preschool years that children can form novel compounds
(Clark and Barron, 1988; Becker, 1994; Nicoladis, under
review a). At this point, it is not clear whether or not
low frequency is related to children's late acquisition of
OV-er compounds.
French VO compounds are relatively infrequent
constructions, perhaps because of the restricted semantics
(i.e., referring prototypically to instruments). According
to Clark (1993), French-speaking children tend to use
fewer novel names for things than children acquiring
Germanic languages at around three to four years of age.
This may be because French relies more on suffixing for
novel word creation and suffixes are not acquired until
later (Clark, 1993). Nicoladis (under review a) shows that
monolingual French-speaking children can only produce
novel VO compounds late in the preschool years. It is
possible that low frequency and/or productivity is related

20

Elena Nicoladis

to French-speaking children's late acquisition of VO
compounds.
Another factor thought to be related to the acquisition
of deverbal compounds is phrasal ordering. This is
particularly relevant where the compound includes both
a verb and an object of that verb, just as verb phrases
do. It has been argued that children use canonical phrasal
ordering in the early stages of acquisition of deverbal
compounds. The evidence for this comes from two
sources: 1) English-speaking children's production of
ungrammatical compounds that are ordered like phrases
(i.e., verb-object) and 2) English-speaking children's
comprehension of OV-er compounds as agent-verb
sequences.
In the process of acquiring English synthetic
compounds, children's novel productions have been
shown to go through three stages (e.g., Clark et al., 1986):
(1) VN (e.g., wash man)
(2) VO (e.g., break bottle), V-ingO (e.g., moving box),
V-erO (e.g., cutter grass)
(3) OV-er (e.g., water drinker)
Evidence for these stages comes from both spontaneous
speech and experimental studies. Data from children's
spontaneous speech have shown that children younger
than three do not usually use objects and verbs in their
lexical creations; instead they almost always use the form
verb-noun (VN), as in open man to refer to a man who
opens something (Clark, 1981; Becker, 1994). In one
study (Clark et al., 1986), children between the ages of
three and six years were shown pictures of actions done
by people and actions done with instruments and asked
to name the picture. In another study, Clark and Barron
(1988) asked children between three and six years to tell
a puppet that used both grammatical and ungrammatical
compounds how to say OV-er compounds correctly. Both
these experimental studies have shown that children make
the same kinds of error in the process of acquiring
synthetic compounds, notably stage 2 errors, in which
children put the verb before the object.
Since the initial research demonstrating children's
acquisition, some discussion about the frequency of stage
2 errors has arisen. Notably, Becker (1994) analyzed
longitudinal data of spontaneous conversations by one
child and found no instances of stage 2 forms. She
argued that children might follow different routes to
acquiring synthetic compounds and could skip stage 2.
An alternative explanation comes from Nicoladis (under
review b), who collected diary data on her son's use of
lexical creations with verbs. She showed that stage 2
forms did occur but not very frequently. It is therefore
possible for data from recorded conversations (as used
in Becker, 1994) to have missed stage 2 forms. Taken
together, these findings suggest that diary studies (e.g.,

Clark, 1981) and experimental studies (e.g., Clark et al.,
1986; Clark and Barron, 1988) are the best methods for
researching children's stage 2 forms because these forms
appear only rarely in children's spontaneous production.
In addition to producing stage 2 forms, monolingual
English-speaking children have been shown to make
agentive errors in their comprehension of novel OV-er
compounds. That is, they sometimes interpret the leftmost
noun of novel OV-er compounds (like sun juggler) to
be the subject of the verb. One example comes from
a study by Nicoladis (under review a) with 36 Englishspeaking children between the ages of 3;3 and 5;8. The
children were shown four pictures, one target, one with
the leftmost noun as agent, one with the noun alone
and one with a V-er. For example, for the test item can
crusher, children were shown a person crushing a can
(target), a can crushing an ant (agentive distractor), a can,
and a person crushing an ant (a crusher). Only the children
with the highest vocabulary scores (see below) picked
the correct answer significantly more often the agentive
distractor. For children with lower vocabulary scores,
there was no difference between the rate of picking the
target and picking the agentive distractor. One possible
interpretation of these results is that children with lower
vocabularies were imposing a phrasal interpretation on
novel OV-er compounds.
If phrasal ordering is related to the acquisition of
deverbal compounds in French, as it is in English (Clark
and Barron, 1988), French-speaking children would be
expected to make few verb-object misorderings in the
process of acquiring VO compounds. They might also
acquire these compounds easily and early. The reason
for that is that typical phrasal ordering for French is
SVO. And, in fact, French-speaking children do not
show reversals in their productions of VO compounds
(Nicoladis, under review a; see also Clark et al., 1986,
p. 28, note 12). However, VO compounds are a fairly
late acquisition. French-speaking children start to use
novel VO compounds at an equivalent age to Englishspeaking children's use of novel OV-er compounds
(Nicoladis, under review a). This result is surprising in
light of the equivalent ordering of French phrases and
compounds. Before French-speaking children produce
VO compounds, their most frequent error is the use of
phrases (e.g., they might say lave des bouteilles `wash
some bottles' to refer to an instrument for washing bottles;
see Nicoladis, under review a).1

1

The words lave des bouteilles could be translated as `wash of bottles'
equally well as `wash some bottles'. The former interpretation would
suggest that children were producing a lexical form and the latter, a
verb phrase. I have opted for the latter translation for two reasons.
First, the children in Nicoladis (under review a) never produced a
determiner in front of these forms - if they had, a lexical interpretation
would certainly be more felicitous. Second, the children could have

Transfer in deverbal compounds
French-speaking children make agentive errors in
comprehension of VO compounds (e.g., they might
interpret lave-bouteille `wash-bottle' as a bottle washing
something), just as English-speaking children do with
OV-er compounds (Nicoladis, under review a). It is not
clear why French-speaking children make agentive errors
in comprehension. It is possible that they are misled by the
frequent occurrence of right-dislocated clausal subjects
(e.g., il lave, le pompier `he washes, the firefighter').
However, even French-English bilingual children have
shown little difficulty in the production of French word
order (Paradis and Genesee, 1996). Alternatively, it is
possible that children interpret the noun in VO compounds
as a modifier of the bare verb stem, since modifying
adjectives and nouns generally appear to the right of
nouns in French. However, this interpretation assumes
that children do not differentiate between a bare verb and
a noun, an assumption that seems unwarranted for the
children in the Nicoladis (under review a) study, who were
all older than three years of age.
To sum up, phrasal ordering has been thought to
play a role in the acquisition of compounds because
of the pattern of results observed in English-speaking
children's productions (e.g., Clark et al., 1986). However,
some doubts have been raised both because of dialectical
differences in English-speaking children (Nicoladis and
Murphy, 2002) and because French-speaking children
produce novel VO compounds only late in the
preschool years. Furthermore, both French-speaking and
English-speaking children make agentive errors in their
comprehension of deverbal compounds. While these
results can be attributed to phrasal ordering for English,
they cannot for French.
The final factor related to the acquisition of compounds
to be discussed here is vocabulary size. Vocabulary
size has been shown to be related to acquisition of
compounding, both in noun-noun compounds (Nicoladis,
2002) and OV-er compounds (Nicoladis, under review
a). The role of vocabulary may be particularly important
in studies of compounding in bilingual children. In
the preschool years, bilingual children seem to score
on average approximately half the score of monolingual children on standardized vocabulary tests (Doyle,
Champagne and Segalowitz, 1978; Nicoladis and
Genesee, 1996). If both languages are tested, however,
bilingual children's total scores are equal to or greater
than those of monolingual children. Because bilingual
children can have smaller vocabularies in one language
than monolinguals and vocabulary size is related to
compounding, it is important to measure vocabulary in
research on the acquisition of compounding. Furthermore,
produced the phrase as an echo of what the experimenter had said - it
seems simpler to interpret these words as imitations rather than give
children credit for creating a novel lexical form.

21

because bilingual children can be the same age as
monolingual children and have smaller vocabularies,
research with bilingual children can shed light on how
vocabulary and age contribute to acquisition.
In sum, deverbal compounds are low in frequency and
productivity in English and French and acquired only late
in the preschool years in both languages. In the course of
acquiring OV-er compounds, English-speaking children
produce ungrammatical VO compounds while Frenchspeaking children tend not to produce lexical forms when
they do not produce target compounds. English-speaking
children make agentive errors in their comprehension of
OV-er compounds, as do French-speaking children in
their comprehension of VO compounds. Finally, children's
vocabulary size has been shown to be related to the
acquisition of deverbal compounds.

The study
The purpose of the present study is to test the hypothesis
that ambiguous morphological structure leads to crosslinguistic transfer. The children were given a compound
production task, one designed to elicit their production
of novel compounds to describe machines acting on
objects. We expected English-speaking children to use
ungrammatical forms, including VO compounds, to
name these machines (as in Clark et al., 1986). These
machines can be named by VO compounds in French.
If ambiguity in the two languages explains when crosslinguistic transfer occurs, the bilingual children should
use more ungrammatical VO compounds in English
than monolingual English-speaking children. They should
also use more correct VO compounds in French than
monolingual French-speaking children.
The children were also given a compound comprehension task, asking them to indicate their comprehension
of novel OV-er compounds in English and novel VO
compounds in French. There is no cross-linguistic
ambiguity for novel English OV-er compounds presented
to children because there is no equivalent structure in
French. The bilingual children should therefore perform
on a par on the comprehension task with the Englishspeaking children. However, the bilingual children should
perform better on the comprehension task than the Frenchspeaking children. They would perform better because
they would have evidence from their ungrammatical
English VO forms that English allows VO compounds
and therefore English VO compounds overlap with
grammatical French VO forms.
The children were also given a vocabulary test in order
to estimate their vocabulary size relative to the other
children in the study. The relationship between vocabulary
size and the acquisition of deverbal compounds can then
be explored.

22

Elena Nicoladis

Method
Participants
A total of 36 French-English bilingual children participated in this study, aged between 3;7 and 5;9. These
children all lived in the area of Edmonton, Alberta,
Canada. The majority language in this region of Canada
is English. There is, however, an active French-speaking
community, including many French-speaking preschools
and activities for preschool children.
To enable a comparison between the bilingual children
and the monolingual children, a total of 42 monolingual
English-speaking children from the Edmonton area
participated in this study. Six of these children were
excluded from the sample discussed here so as to
create an age-matched sample of 36 monolingual English
participants. Children were matched on the basis of being
the same age or up to three months in age different.
As would be expected after matching for age, there
was no significant difference between the groups in age,
t(35) = 0.21, p < .05.
A total of 21 monolingual French-speaking children
between the ages of 3;8 and 5;8 who lived in Montreal,
Quebec, Canada also participated in this study. As these
were the only French monolinguals available to us, the
analyses of the French data presented below are based
on a smaller sample of the bilingual children than the
comparison group for English. The bilingual children
were matched in age with the French monolinguals on
the same matching criterion as above. Again, there was
no significant difference between the two groups in age,
t(20) = 0.21, p < .05.
Most of the statistics presented below are based on
each language group in its entirety. However, in cases
where it is interesting to check for developmental trends,
the English speakers are divided into three age groups,
as summarized in Table 1, and the French speakers are
divided into two age groups, as summarized in Table 2.
Where it was necessary to divide these age groups
between two children of the same age (e.g., age group II
of the bilinguals in English ends at 4;11 and age group III
starts at 4;11), the child more recently tested was placed
in the younger group. This decision was made arbitrarily,
so as not to prejudge how the children performed on any
of the tasks of interest in placing them in age groups.

Materials for the compound production task
For the compound production task, children were shown
machines that were performing an action with objects
and asked to name them. For example, for the English
target sun juggler, a machine juggling suns was shown to
children. Three practice items (hat waterer, truck pusher
and cabbage cutter) were given with single objects; for
example, the truck pusher was pushing a single truck.

Table 1. Average (range) age of English speakers.

I (N = 12)
II (N = 12)
III (N = 12)

Monolingual English

Bilingual (English)

3;11
(3;6-4;5)
4;9
(4;6-4;11)
5;4
(5;0-5;11)

4;1
(3;7-4;5)
4;8
(4;6-4;11)
5;4
(4;11-5;9)

Table 2. Average (range) age of French speakers.

I (N = 10)
II (N = 11)

Monolingual French

Bilingual (French)

4;4
(3;8-4;9)
5;2
(4;9-5;8)

4;3
(3;8-4;9)
5;4
(4;11-5;8)

There were ten test items in English: sun juggler, apple
eater, banana peeler, bell ringer, book burner, coin
dropper, cow brusher, kite flyer, mice hugger and feet
tickler.
The French version was the same format but with different items from the English version. The children
were shown machines that were performing actions with
objects and asked to name them. For example, for the
target craque-oeufs `crack-eggs', a machine cracking
eggs was shown to children. The same practice items
that were used in the English version were used in the
French version, only named with French compounds
(i.e., arrose-chapeau `water-hat' meaning `hat waterer',
pousse-camion `push-truck' meaning `truck pusher' and
coupe-chou `cut-cabbage' meaning `cabbage cutter').
There were ten test items in French: peint-chevaux
`paint-horses' meaning `horse painter', chasse-coeurs
`chase-hearts' meaning `heart chaser', souleve-yeux `hold
up-eyes' meaning `eye holder-upper'(!), craque-oeufs
`crack-eggs' meaning `egg cracker', montre-poupees
`show-dolls' meaning `doll shower', attrape-ananas
`catch-pineapples' meaning `pineapple catcher', pousseboutons `push-buttons' meaning `button pusher', crevebulles `pop-bubbles' meaning `bubble popper', and
ecrase-papillons `squash-butterflies' meaning `butterfly
squasher'; see examples in Figure 1. Note that some of
the French examples resulted in infelicitous English
translations - pilot testing with adults led us to believe
that these forms worked in French.
For the English comprehension task, children were
presented with a display of four pictures separated by
lines and asked to show us the picture associated with a

Transfer in deverbal compounds

23

Figure 1. Example of one English and one French production item.

Figure 2. Example of English comprehension item (can crusher).

novel compound. One picture in the display was the target.
The other three were: an agent performing the action,
the object alone, and an agent performing the action on
something other than the named object. For example, for
can crusher, the target response was a hand crushing
a can. The distractors were a can, a can with a hand
crushing an ant, and a person crushing an ant; see Figure 2
for illustration. Of particular interest for errors are the

agent distractors (e.g., the can crushing an ant). Children
might initially think that the object in can crusher has
an agentive meaning and pick this distractor. The location
of the target structure was varied across items so that it
was located approximately equally often in each quadrant.
There were ten items in English: table cutter, rabbit puller,
paint spiller, man holder, baby painter, house holder, coin
catcher, can crusher, book cooker and ball pusher.

24

Elena Nicoladis

Figure 3. Example of French comprehension item ( frappe-maison).

For the French version of the comprehension task, the
same format was used. Since French uses VO compounds
primarily for instruments, the targets were all instruments.
The distractors were: the object as an agent performing
the action, the object alone and another object entirely.
For example, for frappe-maison, the target was a machine
hitting a house. The distractors were: a house alone, a
house hitting an ant, and an ant; see Figure 3 for this
example. The nine test items were: attrape-fraise `catch
strawberry' meaning `strawberry catcher', ecrase-sou
`squash-coin' meaning `coin squasher', frappe-maison
`knock-house' meaning `house knocker', lave-baignoire
`wash-bathtub' meaning `bathtub washer', pese-bebe
`weigh-baby' meaning `baby weigher', porte-caisse
`carry-crate' meaning `crate carrier', porte-papillon
`carry-butterfly' meaning `butterfly carryer', taille-nez
`sharpen-nose' meaning `nose sharpener', souleve-canot
`lift+up-canoe' meaning `canoe lifter-upper'.

Procedure
The children were asked to perform three tasks, always in
the following order: 1) the Peabody Picture Vocabulary
Test (PPVT; Dunn and Dunn, 1997), 2) a compound
production task and 3) a compound comprehension task.
The comprehension task was presented last so that
children's production would not be affected by recently
hearing novel compounds.

The PPVT is a standardized test of comprehension
vocabulary size. Form IIIA was given to the Englishspeaking children. A translated version of form IIIB was
given to the French-speaking children.
The compound production task was introduced as
follows: "I am going to show some funny machines and
ask you to name them for me. I'll give you some examples
first". The three practice items were introduced thus:
"Here is a machine that is watering a hat. We could call that
a hat waterer". The three practice items were presented in
random order, but always before the test items. The test
items were introduced with: "Now I'm going to ask you to
name the machines for me". Each test item was described,
for example, "Here is a machine that is brushing cows.
What could we call that?" The instructions were the same
in French so that while presenting the craque-oeufs `crackeggs', the experimenter would say "Voici une machine qui
craque des oeufs. Comment pourrait-on l'appeler?" The
children's answers were recorded. If a child's answer did
not contain both the verb and the object (e.g., cow and
brush), the child was nevertheless complimented on his
or her first answer and asked if he/she could think of
another name for the machine. Regardless of the child's
second answer, the task was then continued.
After the production test, the comprehension test was
introduced with: "Now I'm going to show you four
different pictures and ask you to show me the one I name".
In French, the instruction was the same: "Maintenant je

Transfer in deverbal compounds
vais te montrer quatre images et je vais te demander de me
montrer l'image que je nomme". As this task followed the
same format as the PPVT, no practice items were used.
The test items were presented in random order.
The bilingual children were tested both in English
and in French, with about half the children tested first
in English and the other, first in French. All testing was
done by native or fluent speakers of Canadian French
or English, as appropriate, in the children's daycare or
preschool.
One bilingual child did not finish the PPVT in English;
the results from this child are included or excluded
depending on whether or not the analysis relied on the
PPVT scores. Also, the children did not always respond to
all items. For this reason, the results are always presented
in terms of percentages rather than raw numbers.
Coding children's production
The children gave a wide variety of responses on the
production task (see also Clark et al., 1986). If a child
gave two answers, the answer deemed closer to the target
form was counted. For English production, to count OV-er
compounds, we included all exact target forms (e.g., "sun
juggler" for the target sun juggler) as well as any forms
including a plural -s (e.g., "mice huggers" even though
there was only one machine hugging mice). We also
included any forms in which the child changed the verb or
the noun but produced the correct form (e.g., "mouse
holder" for the target mouse hugger and "toe tickler"
for the target foot tickler). To count VO compounds in
English, we counted any form where a child produced a
bare verb and a bare noun (e.g., "ring-bell" for the target
bell ringer) as well as any forms with a plural or third
person -s (e.g., "rings-bells" and "drops-coins").
As will be seen below, our criteria for inclusion
excluded the majority of children's responses. The other
kinds of children's responses included noun-MACHINE
(e.g., "cow machine", "cow machiney"), noun-er (e.g.,
"kiter"), noun-noun-MACHINE (e.g., "banana monkey
machine"), OV (e.g., "mice hugs", "bell ring", "kite
fly"), V-erO (e.g., "juggler sun", "lighter book"),
MACHINE V-er (e.g., "machine peeler"), VO-er (e.g.,
"ring beller"), V-erO-er (e.g., "dropper coiner"), O-erVer (e.g., "booker burner"), V-ingO (e.g., "eating apple"),
OV-ing (e.g., "banana peeling", "sun juggling"), VingO-MACHINE (e.g., "flying kite machine"). Children
sometimes produced whole phrases to respond (e.g., "a
machine that's burning books"). They also occasionally
produced silly responses or nonsense (e.g., "feddy",
"Mr. Sun", "apple black", "dingdong").
For the French production task, any VO form that
corresponded exactly to the target was counted (e.g.,
"montre-poupee" for the target montre-poupee). We also
accepted items that had VO form with a different verb than
we had used in describing the machine (e.g., "souleve-

25

Figure 4. Average PPVT scores by language and group.

poupee" `lift+up-doll' for the target montre-poupee or
"casse-oeufs" `break-eggs' for the target craque-oeufs).
Two different bilingual children for one item each
switched the verb in the VO to English ("squish-papillon"
for the target ecrase-papillons and "push-bouton" for
pousse-boutons); we included these two items as French
VO.
The majority of the children's productions in French
did not fall into the VO category, as will be seen below.
There was a wide variety of responses other than VO
that the children made. These other responses included: V-determiner-object (e.g., "montre la poupee" `show
the doll'), MACHINE-Preposition-Vinfinitive -determinerobject (e.g., "machine a crever les oeufs" `machine for
popping the eggs'), MACHINE-noun (e.g., "machineboutons" `machine button'), MACHINE-prepositionnoun (e.g., "machine d'ananas" `machine of pineapples'),
noun-suffix (e.g., "boutonnier"), V-er-prepostion+determiner-object (e.g., "coupeur des fleurs" `cutter of the
flowers'). One of the most frequent responses in French
was phrases like "attrape des ananas" `catch some
pineapples' which could have been a repetition of
the experimenter's utterance. Children also occasionally
produced longer phrases like "prend papillon de l'arbre
et l'ecrase" `take butterfly from the tree and squish it'
(note that there was no tree in the picture). Children also
occasionally produced nonsense or silly responses like
"marie", "un tata oeuf" `a tata egg', or "des bulles-bulles"
`some bubbles-bubbles'.
In the present study, the analyses are focused uniquely
on OV-er and VO forms in English and VO forms
in French. No attempt has been made to compare the
bilinguals' and the monolinguals' productions of other
kinds of produced forms as no hypotheses have been made
about them.

Results
Vocabulary
The average vocabulary scores by language group are
presented in Figure 4. As expected, the vocabulary scores
of the bilingual children were significantly lower than

26

Elena Nicoladis

Table 3. Average (and standard deviation) of English
PPVT scores by language group and age.

I
II
III

Monolingual English

Bilingual (English)

58.3 (12.3)
72.8 (19.7)
80.1 (22.3)

43.6 (14.1)
58.3 (18.9)
68.8 (26.5)

Table 4. Average (and standard deviation) of French
PPVT scores by language group and age.

I
II

Monolingual French

Bilingual (French)

56.6 (18.5)
72.4 (17.4)

46.3 (14.1)
44.5 (32.3)

those of the monolingual children in English, t(34) = 2.58,
p < .05, and in French, t(20) = 2.85, p < .01.
Because vocabulary size is related to exposure time
for preschool bilingual children (Pearson, Fernandez,
Lewedag and Oller, 1997), their vocabulary scores may
not necessarily increase linearly with age, as might
be expected for monolingual children. Tables 3 and 4
summarize the average PPVT scores by age for English
and French respectively. As can be seen in Table 3,
the English PPVT scores increased by age for both the
monolingual and the bilingual group, although the scores
for the bilingual children were always lower than those for
the monolingual children. In French, as shown in Table 4,
the older monolingual children's vocabulary scores were
higher than the younger children's scores. The same was
not true of the bilingual children - the older children's
vocabulary scores were lower and much more variable
than the younger children's vocabulary scores. To the
extent that vocabulary is implicated in the acquisition of
VO compounds in French, the younger bilingual children
in this group might perform better than the older bilingual
children.
English
The first hypothesis to be tested was that the bilingual
children would produce more VO compounds in English
than monolingual children. Table 5 summarizes the
number of children who produced the target OV-er forms
and VO compounds on the production task. 17% (6/36) of
the monolingual children and 42% (15/36) of the bilingual
children produced VO compounds. There was a significant
difference between the language groups on the number of
children who produced OV-er and VO compounds,  2
(1) = 5.84, p < .05. Within the language groups, there
was no significant difference in the number of children

Table 5. Number of children who produced each form.

I (N = 12)
II (N = 12)
III (N = 12)
TOTAL

Monolingual English

Bilingual (English)

OV-er

VO

OV-er

VO

6
6
8
20

2
2
2
6

4
3
5
12

6
7
2
15

 Ungrammatical

Figure 5. Average percentage of verb-object forms
produced in English by language and age group.

who produced VO compounds by age group, either
for the monolingual children,  2 (2) = 2.03, p > .05, or for
the bilingual children  2 (2) = 5.43, p > .05.
Another way to see if the bilingual children produced
more VO compounds is to look at the rate of these forms
used by each child. The monolingual children produced
an average of 25.8% (SD = 33.7%) of OV-er forms and
the bilingual children produced 13.9% (SD = 29.2%) of
OV-er forms. The monolingual children produced an
average of 3.1% (SD = 7.5%) of VO compounds and the
bilingual children produced 11.1% (SD = 11.4%) of VO
compounds. There was a significant difference between
the two language groups in the rate of VO compounds
produced, t(35) = 2.19, p < .05.
An item analysis also showed a significant difference
between the two language groups in the rate of
VO compounds produced, t(9) = 4.66, p < .01. The
monolingual children produced an average of 3.1%
(SD = 3.6%) of VO compounds by item and the bilingual
children 11.1% (SD = 4.1%). Figure 5 summarizes the
average rate of VO compound use by child as a function
of language and age groups. As can be seen, the rate of
VO compounds remains fairly stable across the age groups
for monolingual children. However, the rate of verb-object
compounds shows an inverted-U function for the bilingual
children.
It is unclear why the bilingual children should show an
inverted-U shaped function in their rate of VO compounds

Transfer in deverbal compounds

27

Table 6. Correlation coefficients for experimental tasks in English and age or
PPVT by language group.

% OV-er production
% VO production
% correct comprehension

Monolingual English

Bilingual (English)

PPVT

Age

PPVT

Age

.543**
.139
.599**

.365*
- .163
.332*

.369*
.229
.435**

.261
.037
.200

** p < .01, * p < .05
 Ungrammatical

Table 7. Number of children who produced target form.

I
II
TOTAL

Figure 6. Average percentage of correct target chosen in
English comprehension task by language and age group.

produced in English. If VO compound use were related to
vocabulary size and the bilingual group II were lower in
vocabulary than either group I or III, this function would
be explained. However, as can be seen in Table 3 above, the
vocabulary size of the bilingual group increased linearly
with age in English. Furthermore, the correlation between
the PPVT scores and rate of VO compounds is modest for
both groups (see Table 6).
Turning now to the results for the comprehension
test, it was predicted that bilingual children would be on
a par with monolingual children. The average percentange correct by subject was 39.9% (SD = 22.2%) for
the bilingual children and 43.4% (SD = 26.9%) for the
monolingual children. There was no significant difference
between the two language groups in terms of percentage
correct on the comprehension task, t(35) = 0.61, p > .05.
By items, the average percentage correct was 53.0%
(SD = 17.7%) for the bilingual children and 51.1%
(SD = 18.6%) for the monolingual children. There was
no significant difference between the two groups on the
item analysis, t(9) = 0.53, p > .05. The lack of difference
holds true, even when vocabulary scores were covaried
for a subject analysis, F(1, 67) = 0.37, p < .05. Figure 6
summarizes the average rate of correct pictures chosen by
the children in both language groups and across age. Both
groups increased their number of correct responses as the
age increased.

Monolingual French

Bilingual (French)

4
5
9

4
8
12

Table 6 summarizes the correlation coefficients
between age and PPVT scores and the results of the
experimental tasks from this study. The correlations
between production and comprehension of the target
forms on the one hand and PPVT on the other hand
were significant and positive. Age did not correlate at all
with production and comprehension of the target forms.
The correlations between production of VO compounds in
English were positive but not significant for both language
groups.
The percentage correct on the production and comprehension tasks was highly correlated for the monolingual children, r(34) = .433, p < .01, but only modestly
correlated for bilingual children, r(34) = .135, p > .05.
The difference between the two language groups
is due to the fact that for monolingual children,
production and comprehension of OV-er compounds
increased with vocabulary and age. For bilingual children,
comprehension increased with vocabulary and age, but
production did not (see Figure 4 above). The bilingual
children were more likely to produce VO forms at all ages
than the monolingual children and their comprehension
was at an age-appropriate level, even though their English
vocabularies were smaller.
French
The hypothesis for French was that the bilingual children
would produce more VO compounds (the target form)
than monolingual children. As can be seen in Table 7,
43% (9/21) of the monolingual children produced verbobject compounds while 57% (12/21) of the bilingual

28

Elena Nicoladis

children did. There was, however, no significant difference
between the number of children who produced this form
by language group,  2 (1) = 0.27, p > .05.
The bilingual group averaged 26.3% (SD = 32.6%)
target forms on the production task and the monolingual
group 21.7% (SD = 33.9%) target forms. There was no
significant difference between the rate of target forms
produced by language group, t(20) = 0.99, p >. 05. By
item, the bilingual children produced an average of
27.1% (SD = 3.9%) and the monolingual children 20.9%
(SD = 4.0%). There was a significant difference between
the two language groups on the item analysis, t(9) = 3.88,
p < .01.
While there was no difference on the subject
analysis between bilingual and monolingual children,
recall that the two groups differed on vocabulary
scores. Furthermore, vocabulary scores were related to
production of VO compounds (see Table 8 below). It
is possible that the bilingual children might do better
than the monolingual children if their vocabulary scores
were held statistically constant. To do this, an analysis of
covariance on the rate of target forms produced by group
was performed, with the PPVT scores as the covariate.
This analysis showed a marginally significant difference
between the two groups, F(1, 39) = 3.88, p = .056. The
adjusted means on the production task with PPVT as a
covariate were 31% target forms for the bilingual group
and 12% for the monolingual group. These adjusted
means show that when vocabulary size is taken into
account, the bilingual children produced almost three
times as many target forms as the monolingual children.
Figure 7 graphs the average scores on the French
production task by age. For both linguistic groups,
the older children produced more target forms than the
younger children, although the difference is very small
for the monolingual children.
The prediction for comprehension was that the
bilingual children would have higher scores than
monolingual children. On the comprehension task, a
subject analysis showed the bilingual children scored
an average of 46.0% (SD = 21.2%) correct and the
monolingual children 48.9% (SD = 18.5%). There was no
significant difference between the two language groups in
terms of their comprehension of novel VO compounds,
t(20) = 0.46, p > .05. On an item analysis, the bilingual
children scored an average of 39.4% (SD = 20.4%)
correct and the monolingual children an average of
44.4% (SD = 14.3%). There was no significant difference
between the two groups on the item analysis, t(8) = 0.93,
p >.05. The lack of difference between the groups held
true on a subject analysis even when the PPVT scores
were covaried, F(1, 39) = 0.80, p > .05.
Figure 8 summarizes the average scores on the
comprehension task by age. The younger bilingual
children performed better than the older bilingual children

Figure 7. Average percentage of target forms produced in
French by language and age group.

Figure 8. Average percentage of correct target chosen in
French comprehension task by language and age group.

and the older monolingual children better than the younger
monolingual children.
A summary of the correlation coefficients between
scores on the French experimental tasks and age or PPVT
scores can be found in Table 8. While vocabulary was
generally better correlated with task scores than age, the
correlations between production and comprehension of
target forms reached significance only for the bilingual
children.
The rates of target forms produced and correct forms
understood were significantly correlated for the bilingual
children, r(19) = .483, p < .05, but not for the monolingual
children, r(19) = .131, p > .05. The reason for this seems
to be that the monolingual children's comprehension of
target forms was better for the older group than the
younger group, but the increase in production of target
forms across the age groups was small.
In sum, the bilingual children produced more VO
compounds in French than monolingual children on
an item analysis and on a subject analysis when their
vocabulary size was held constant. Their comprehension
of novel VO compounds was at an age-appropriate
level compared to monolingual children, but was not
significantly different.

Transfer in deverbal compounds

29

Table 8. Correlation coefficients for experimental tasks in French and
age or PPVT by language group.

% VO production
% correct comprehension

Monolingual French

Bilingual (French)

PPVT

Age

PPVT

Age

.373
.131

- .010
- .188

.471*
.483*

.321
.062

* p < .05

Discussion
The purpose of this study was to see if ambiguous
morphology would lead to cross-linguistic transfer in
French-English bilingual children. Recall that monolingual preschool English-speaking children have been
reported to go through a stage in their acquisition of
OV-er compounds when they produce ungrammatical VO
compounds (Clark and Barron, 1988). VO compounds are
grammatical in French and they are acquired at around
four to five years of age by monolingual French-speaking
children (Nicoladis, under review a). Because Englishspeaking children allow VO compounds in English, I
predicted that bilingual children would produce more
VO compounds than monolingual children and be on
a par with monolingual children in their understanding
novel OV-er compounds. In French, the prediction was
that bilingual children would show an advantage over
monolingual children in producing and understanding
novel VO compounds on the basis of influence from their
ungrammatical English VO compounds.
The results presented here support the predictions
for production, but not comprehension. That is, in
English, the bilingual children produced ungrammatical
VO compounds significantly more often than monolingual
children. In French, the bilingual children produced
more VO compounds than monolingual children both
on a subject analysis, once vocabulary was statistically
controlled for, and on an item analysis. In comprehension,
however, the children performed on a par with
monolingual children in both languages even though
their vocabulary size is significantly smaller in both
languages. One possible interpretation of these results
is that the predictions work for English but not for
French. However, a more parsimonious interpretation with
currently available data is that cross-linguistic transfer
is a phenomenon of language production, rather than
comprehension (see also Nicoladis, 2002).
This study has shown a difference between bilingual
children and monolingual children's production of
deverbal compounds. These differences could be the
result of delayed English acquisition and advanced French
acquisition by bilingual children relative to monolingual
children (see Paradis and Genesee, 1996, for discussion).

Evidence for delayed English acquisition would come
from the fact that the production of VO compounds has
been seen at an earlier stage in acquisition than OV-er
compounds (Clark et al., 1986). Bilingual children might
produce more VO compounds than monolingual children
simply because there were more bilingual children at that
stage in acquisition. However, the data presented here
cast some doubt that VO compounds occur at an earlier
stage than OV-er compounds (see also Becker, 1994).
In the present study, the monolingual children produced
VO compounds in English at the rate of 2% consistently
across the age range studied here (3;6-5;11). Furthermore,
if VO compounds characterized a stage, one would expect
a negative correlation between the rate of production and
age (cf. Clark et al., 1986). However, no correlation with
either age or vocabulary was found in this study. These
results point to the possibility that VO compounds are
a consistent error made by English-speaking children in
the preschool years, but it is not a stage that they go
through. If VO compounds do not constitute a stage for
monolingual children, then bilingual children may not be
delayed in their acquisition - they simply produce more.
Further evidence against the idea that bilingual children
are delayed in English is the fact that their comprehension
scores in this study were on a par with monolingual
children of the same age.
There is some evidence that the bilingual children were
advanced in their acquisition of French VO compounds
relative to monolingual children. The bilingual children
produced more VO compounds than monolingual children
even though they had smaller vocabularies. Furthermore,
their comprehension was on a par with that of monolingual children, again, even though they had smaller
vocabularies. These results point to the children being
advanced in their vocabulary size in the acquisition
of French VO compounds. However, to be consistent
with the results from the English part of this study,
it is more parsimonious to conclude that the bilingual
children were simply different from the monolingual
children in terms of their rate of production of VO
compounds in both languages. In French, this difference
happened to be in the direction of the grammatical VO
form. Even if this conclusion is correct with regard
to deverbal compounds, it does not necessarily follow

30

Elena Nicoladis

that all differences between bilingual and monolingual
children are merely differences. Some differences could
be indicative of advanced or delayed development (see
Gawlitzek-Maiwald, and Tracy, 1996, for an example of
advanced development; see Paradis and Genesee, 1996,
for discussion).
Cross-linguistic transfer can occur in cases of
ambiguous morphology. In searching for an explanation
for transfer, it may be appropriate to consider all
structural aspects of language (e.g., syntax, morphology,
phonology). To date, the hypothesis that structural
ambiguity leads to cross-linguistic transfer and lack of
ambiguity leads to no transfer has been largely upheld by
research findings (e.g., Hulk and Muller, 2000). The only
finding with regard to cross-linguistic transfer that does
not correspond to the structural ambiguity hypothesis is
that of Nicoladis (2002), who showed transfer in nounnoun compounds for French-English bilingual children
even though the compounds do not overlap. As this
study is the only exception to the general rule, it may
be that it is not the structural ambiguity hypothesis
that is incorrect, but rather researchers' classifications of
children's structures. In other words, it is possible that
researchers have not yet identified the cues that children
use in learning to order their noun-noun compounds. For
example, it is possible that adjectival phrases, with similar
meaning to noun-noun compounds, influence children's
acquisition of noun-noun compounds. Adjectives in
French can occur both prenominally and postnominally
so they might influence children's compound ordering.
While this hypothesis has not held up to testing to
date (Nicoladis, 1999, 2002), no study has yet done the
crucial test, namely asking children to produce both novel
adjectival phrases and novel compounds.
The results from the present study have supported
Hulk and Muller's (2000) and Dopke's (1998) idea that
in identifying ambiguous structures, it is essential to
consider WHAT CHILDREN THINK IS AMBIGUOUS. The data
shown here are based on ungrammatical compounds
in English. Yet even monolingual children allow these
ungrammatical forms in English. Furthermore, the results
of the present study support Hulk and Muller's (2000) and
Dopke's (1998) reasoning that bilingual children's crosslinguistic transfer is manifested in forms that monolingual
children produce, only the frequency of these forms differs
from that of monolingual children.

References
Baker, M. C. (1998). Comments on the paper by Sadock. In
S. G. Lapointe, D. K. Brentari & P. M. Farrell (eds.),
Morphology and its relation to phonology and syntax,
pp. 188-212. Stanford, CA: Center for the Study of
Language and Information.
Bates, E. & MacWhinney, B. (1989). Functionalism and the

Competition Model. In B. MacWhinney & E. Bates (eds.),
The crosslinguistic study of sentence processing, pp. 157-
193. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Becker, J. A. (1994). `Sneak-shoes', `sworders' and `nosebeards': A case study of lexical innovation. First Language,
14, 195-211.
Berman, R. A. & Clark, E. V. (1989). Learning to use compounds
for contrast: Data from Hebrew. First Language, 9, 247-
270.
Clahsen, H. (1995). German plurals in adult second language
development: Evidence for a dual mechanism model of
inflection. In L. Eubank, L. Selinker & M. Sharwood Smith
(eds.), The current state of interlanguage, pp. 123-137.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Clark, E. V. (1981). Lexical innovations: How children
learn to create new words. In W. Deutsch (ed.), The
child's construction of language, pp. 299-328. New York:
Academic Press.
Clark, E. V. (1993). The lexicon in acquisition. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Clark, E. V. (1998). Lexical creativity in French-speaking
children. Cahiers de Psychologie Cognitive, 17, 513-
530.
Clark, E. V. & Barron, B. J. S. (1988). A thrower button or a
button thrower? Children's judgments of grammatical and
ungrammatical compound nouns. Linguistics, 26, 3-19.
Clark, E. V. & Berman, R. A. (1987). Types of linguistic
knowledge: Interpreting and producing compound nouns.
Journal of Child Language, 14, 547-567.
Clark, E. V., Gelman, S. A. & Lane, N. M. (1985). Compound
nouns and category structure in young children. Child
Development, 56, 84-94.
Clark, E. V., Hecht, B. F. & Mulford, R. C. (1986). Coining
complex compounds in English: Affixes and word order in
acquisition. Linguistics, 24, 7-29.
Dopke, S. (1998). Competing language structures: The
acquisition of verb placement by bilingual German-English
children. Journal of Child Language, 25, 555-584.
Doyle, A.-B., Champagne, M. & Segalowitz, N. (1978). Some
issues in the assessment of linguistic consequences of early
bilingualism. In M. Paradis (ed.), Aspects of bilingualism,
pp. 13-20. Columbia, SC: Hornbeam Press.
Dunn, L. M. & Dunn, L. M. (1997). Peabody Picture Vocabulary
Test, third edition. Circle Pines, MN: American Guidance
Service.
Fabb, N. (1998). Compounding. In A. Spencer & A. M. Zwicky
(eds.), The handbook of morphology, pp. 66-83. Oxford:
Blackwell Publishers.
Gawlitzek-Maiwald, I. & Tracy, R. (1996). Bilingual
bootstrapping. Linguistics, 34, 901-926.
Hulk, A. (1997). The acquisition of French object pronouns by
a Dutch/French bilingual child. In A. Sorace, C. Heycock
& R. Shillcock (eds.), Language acquisition: Knowledge,
representation and processin (Proceedings of the GALA
1997 Conference on Language Acquisition), pp. 521-526.
Edinburgh: University of Edinburgh.
Hulk, A. & Muller, N. (2000). Bilingual first language
acquisition at the interface between syntax and pragmatics. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 3, 227-
244.

Transfer in deverbal compounds
Marchand, H. (1960). The categories and types of present-day
English word formation. Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz.
Meisel, J. M. (1983). Transfer as a second-language strategy.
Language and Communication, 3, 11-46.
Muller, N. (1998). Transfer in bilingual first language
acquisition. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 1,
151-171.
Nicoladis, E. (1999). "Where is my brush-teeth?" Acquisition
of compound nouns in a bilingual child. Bilingualism:
Language and Cognition, 2, 245-256.
Nicoladis, E. (2002). What's the difference between `toilet paper'
and `paper toilet'? French English bilingual children's
crosslinguistic transfer in compound nouns. Journal of
Child Language, 29, 843-863.
Nicoladis, E. (under review a). Children do not learn compound
ordering from phrasal ordering: Acquisition of synthetic
compounds by monolingual English- and French-speaking
preschoolers.
Nicoladis, E. (under review b). When there is no difference
between a hanger light and a hanging light in the
acquisition of complex names for things.
Nicoladis, E. & Genesee, F. (1996). Word awareness in
second language learners and bilingual children. Language
Awareness, 5, 80-90.
Nicoladis, E. & Genesee, F. (1997). Language development in
preschool bilingual children. Journal of Speech-Language
Pathology and Audiology, 21, 258-270.
Nicoladis, E. & Murphy, V. A. (2002). Constraints on English
compound production. What is the role of the input? Paper

31

presented at the Third Internal Mental Lexicon Conference,
Banff, Alberta, Canada. October 8, (2002).
Nicoladis, E. & Yin, H. (2002). The role of frequency in
acquisition of English and Chinese compounds by bilingual
children. In B. Skarabela, S. Fish & A. H.-J. Do (eds.),
Proceedings of the Boston University Conference on
Language Development, pp. 441-452. Somerville, MA:
Cascadilla Press.
Paradis, J. (2001). Do bilingual 2-year-olds have separate phonological systems? International Journal of Bilingualism, 5,
19-38.
Paradis, J. & Genesee, F. (1996). Syntactic acquisition in
bilingual children: Autonomous or independent? Studies
in Second Language Acquisition, 18, 1-25.
Pearson, B. Z., Fernandez, S., Lewedag, V. & Oller, K. (1997).
Input factors in lexical learning of bilingual infants (ages
10 to 30 months). Applied Psycholinguistics, 18, 41-58.
Quirk, R., Greenbaum, S., Leech, G. & Svartvik, J. (1985). A
comprehensive grammar of the English language. London:
Longman.
Sadock, J. M. (1998). On the autonomy of compounding
morphology. In S. G. Lapointe, D. K. Brentari & P. M.
Farrell (eds.), Morphology and its relation to phonology
and syntax, pp. 161-187. Stanford, CA: Center for the
Study of Language and Information.
Selkirk, E. O. (1982). The syntax of words. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Received July 2, 2002 Revision accepted October 30, 2002

