C 2004 Cambridge University Press DOI: 10.1017/S1366728904001592
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition 7 (3), 2004, 207-226 

Early and late Spanish-English
bilinguals' acquisition of
English word stress patterns

207

SUSAN G. GUION
Department of Linguistics, University of Oregon

T E T S U O H A R A DA
Department of East Asian Languages and Literatures,
University of Oregon

J. J. C L A R K
Department of Linguistics, University of Oregon

Guion, Clark, Harada and Wayland (2003) found that three factors affect English speakers' stress placement on bisyllabic
non-words: syllabic structure, lexical class and stress patterns of phonologically similar real words. The current replication
and extension included three groups (N = 30): native English speakers, early Spanish-English bilinguals, and late
Spanish-English bilinguals. Participants produced and gave perceptual judgments on 40 non-words of varying syllabic
structures in noun and verb sentence frames. A regression analysis used the three factors to predict stress placement in
production and perception. All three groups showed significant effects from stress patterns of phonologically similar real
words and lexical class. The effect of syllabic structure for early bilinguals was slightly different from that of native speakers
and late bilinguals showed greatly reduced effects. Late bilinguals exhibited more initial stress overall, possibly due to L1
transfer. These results run counter to the prediction made by Long (1990) about age effects on phonological acquisition.

Introduction
Many studies have shown that late learners tend to speak
a second language with a heavier accent than early
learners. The age of second language acquisition seems
to be the most important predictor of degree of foreign
accent (Flege, Yeni-Komshian and Liu, 1999; see also
Piske, MacKay and Flege, 2001, for a review).1 Drawing
conclusions from a comprehensive review, Long (1990)
proposed that a native-like accent would be impossible
unless first exposure was quite early, before six years of
age for most individuals, and no individual who began
learning a second language after the age of 12 would be
able to attain a native-like accent.
A foreign accent may be caused by non native-like
pronunciation of segmental elements (e.g. consonants and
vowels) as well as prosodic elements (e.g. word stress and
intonation) of the second language phonological system.

* This research was supported by a grant (DC05132) from the National
Institutes of Health (National Institute on Deafness and Other
Communication Disorders). We would like to thank four anonymous
reviewers and Jonathan Loftin for helpful comments on the manuscript
and Carlos Alvarez Gonzales for providing us a copy of the database
of Spanish syllable types.
1 It must be noted, however, that other factors such as length of
residence in the second-language-speaking country and amount of
first and/or second language use have also been shown to predict
foreign accent (Flege, Munro and MacKay 1995a; Guion, Flege and
Loftin 2000; Yeni-Komshian, Flege and Liu 2000, among others).
These factors tend to be confounded with age of acquisition due to
subject characteristics (Flege, 1998). Thus, differences between early
and late learners in ultimate phonological attainment may not be due
to age of acquisition effects alone.

While many studies have been conducted comparing the
acquisition of segmental production by early and late
learners (Flege, 1991, 1993; Flege, Munro and MacKay,
1995b; Munro, Flege and MacKay, 1996; Flege, MacKay
and Meador, 1999; Guion, 2003, among others), relatively
few studies (see review in the following section) have been
conducted comparing prosodic acquisition by early and
late learners. It is an aim of the current study to investigate
the acquisition of elements of the English word stress
system by early and late Spanish-English bilinguals.
Another aim of the current study is to investigate
the ability of early and late learners to acquire different
aspects of the word stress system in English. It has
been shown that late learners are more successful in
acquiring some aspects of the grammatical system of
the second language than others (Neville, 1999; WeberFox and Neville, 1999). Thus, it is probable that late
bilinguals may be more likely to acquire some aspects of
English word stress than others. The ability of early and
late Spanish-English bilinguals to acquire the relatively
complex patterns associated with syllabic structure and
the relatively simple pattern associated with lexical class,
as well as the ability for analogical extension of stress
patterns from previously acquired words will be studied.
Previous studies on second language acquisition
of English stress
The majority of previous work on second language
acquisition of English stress has focused on the transfer
of first language rules or on the learning of second
language rules for stress placement. The rules of stress

Address for correspondence
Susan G. Guion, Department of Linguistics, 1290 University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403-1290, USA
E-mail: guion@uoregon.edu

208

S. G. Guion, T. Harada and J. J. Clark

placement are taken from the phonological literature
describing and modeling stress patterns based on syllable
and foot structure. However, empirical investigation into
the cognitive reality of the proposed phonological rules
for native speakers is rarely conducted.
Some studies have suggested that second language
learners can acquire new stress rules, although the patterns
may differ from the phonological models proposed for
the target language. Erdmann (1973) had late German
learners of English read lists of real English adjectives;
some words were known and others were not. The
participants showed patterns in their stress placement
that differed from predictions made by both English
and German rules of stress placement found in the
phonological literature. Similarly, Mairs (1989) recorded
native Spanish speakers who were studying English in the
United States and who were proficient enough to hold a
conversation in English reading English words, sentences
and paragraphs which contained real English target words.
Some words were stressed in a native-like fashion by the
participants and others were not. The incorrect forms
showed a pattern of stress placement that Mairs argued
was a product of learning a modified set of English stress
rules (modified with respect to native speakers).
Other studies have found that the stress patterns of
the first language may transfer into the second language.
Archibald (1992) had adult native Polish speakers living in
an English-speaking country who had studied English for
one month to six years read real English words in isolation
and in sentences. Participants also listened to English
words and noted stress placement. The placement of stress
showed regularities that could be attributed to the transfer
of Polish stress patterns. Archibald (1993) investigated the
production of real English words read by native Spanish
adult learners of English and noted that errors patterned
by syllabic structure type. Archibald proposed that the
errors were due to the transfer of Spanish stress rules but
noted that, in the case of correctly stressed words, it was
difficult to determine if transferred Spanish stress rules or
(mis-)learned English stress rules were applying.
The above studies focused on native speakers of stress
languages and found evidence for some acquisition or
transfer of stress patterns. However, in a study with
native speakers of the non-stress languages Chinese and
Japanese reading real English words, Archibald (1997)
found that the errors did not seem to be related to syllabic
structure or lexical class. In fact the errors did not have
any readily discernable pattern. Thus, it seems that native
speakers of a stress language are more likely to show
evidence of learning stress patterns than first language
speakers of a non-stress language.
In contrast to the above studies, which focused on late
bilinguals, Pater (1997) investigated the acquisition of
stress patterns by early bilinguals and found that even
early learners did not show much evidence of learning

second language stress patterns. In this study, early French
learners of English were recorded reading non-words, all
in a noun context at the beginning of a sentence. The
results showed little consistency in stress placement. For
the most part, errors were non-systematic. In the few
forms that showed systematic stress placement, patterns
were similar to English in some cases and in other cases
the patterns were unlike English or French. This study
also included a native English control group. Interestingly,
the stress placement for the control group did not follow
many of the predictions for stress placement made by
phonological models either. Pater suggested that native
speakers were likely assigning stress based on analogy
with real English words.
Several aspects of the above studies make them difficult
to interpret. First, most assume that the stress rules
proposed in the phonological literature are actually at
work in native speakers but do no empirical investigation
to support this assumption. In the one case in which data
from English speakers was also collected (Pater, 1997), it
seems that factors other than the stress predictions made
by phonological models were also at work. Second, the
interpretation that correctly stressed words are a product
of rule learning is not the only plausible interpretation:
Word stress could be memorized on a word-by-word
basis (cf. Pater, 1997, for this critique). Third, both
correct and incorrect stress placement could be due either
to analogy with similar lexical items or to knowledge
of stress patterns. The studies provide no method for
determining whether knowledge of stress patterns, wordby-word learning, or analogy with similar words best fits
the cognitive reality of the learners. Fourth, none of the
studies allowed for a comparison between early and late
learners. Fifth, age of acquisition, length of exposure to
and/or proficiency in the target language were not reported
in several of the studies.
The possibility that English learners could detect
and learn statistical patterns of stress placement has
received relatively less attention than the investigation of
phonological rule acquisition. As detailed below, English
bisyllabic nouns are more likely to have initial syllable
stress and bisyllabic verbs are more likely to have final
stress. Native English speakers have been shown to be
sensitive to this distributional property and to demonstrate
effects of its knowledge in experiments with non-words
(Baker and Smith, 1976; Guion, Clark, Harada and
Wayland, 2003).
In a study specifically designed to investigate second
language learners' ability to learn statistical lexical
patterns, Davis and Kelly (1997) tested both native
and nonnative English speakers' knowledge about the
tendency for differing stress placement for nouns and
verbs. In their first experiment, they took the important
step of determining whether nonnative speakers were able
to hear stress placement in English, a prerequisite for

Stress patterns in bilinguals
learning any stress pattern. They found that non-native
English speakers were able to hear stress placement on
spoken English words at near-native levels. This was the
case for native speakers of non-stress languages such as
Cantonese, Japanese and Korean as well as for native
speakers of stress languages such as Finnish, German and
Spanish. In addition, they found that age of arrival in an
English-speaking country (range of 5-27 yrs.) and length
of residence (range of .25-16 yrs.) were not correlated
with accuracy in perception. In a second experiment,
Davis and Kelly presented the same participants with
bisyllabic English non-words varying in stress placement
and asked the participants to use the non-word in a
sentence in any way they wanted. They found that, for
both natives and non-natives, words with final stress were
more likely to be used in a sentence as verbs than words
with initial stress were. Again, age of arrival and length
of residence were not correlated with performance.
Davis and Kelly (1997) conducted a third experiment
with another set of nonnative speakers from a variety of
linguistic backgrounds and with varying age of acquisition
and length of residence in an English-speaking country.
Subjects performed a speeded classification of bisyllabic
real English words as nouns or verbs. Half of the nouns
and verbs had initial stress. The nonnative participants
made more errors and were slower classifying nouns with
final stress than nouns with initial stress and verbs with
initial stress than verbs with final stress. Davis and
Kelly interpreted these results to mean that the nonnative
speakers had learned the English noun-verb stress
difference.
The current study extends research into the second
language acquisition of English stress patterns in several
ways. First, the rules for English stress described in
phonological models are not simply assumed to be part
of native speakers' knowledge. Instead, native English
controls are used to determine what sort of stress patterns
native English speakers have knowledge of. Second, two
experimental groups are included in the study, early and
late learners, and are matched on English proficiency.
While length of residence and amount of education in
an English environment is not equivalent between the two
groups, all participants have been immersed in an Englishspeaking environment for a minimum of five years. Third,
the predicted effects of English syllabic structure as
well as knowledge of the noun-verb stress difference
are independently manipulated. Fourth, the possibility
that non-words are assigned stress by analogy to similar
real words is investigated by collecting phonologically
similar real words from the participants. A regression
analysis is used to evaluate the relative contribution of
three variables (syllabic structure, lexical class and phonological similarity) on the placement of stress in non-words.
Finally, many previous studies investigating knowledge
of stress patterns have relied on production data alone

209

(Davis and Kelly, 1997, notwithstanding). It is possible
that learners have acquired knowledge of English stress
patterns, but that this knowledge may not be robust enough
to use in an on-line production task. For this reason, a
perceptual judgment task, in addition to a production task,
is administered in the current study. Such a task may prove
to be a more sensitive measure, as no production demands
are made on the processing system.

The three factors under investigation
The three factors affecting stress placement on nonwords to be investigated in the current study vary in
their complexity of patterning. The factor of syllabic
structure is the most complex, while the factor of lexical
class is relatively simpler. The third factor concerns
the effect of stress placement in real words that are
phonologically similar to the stimulus non-words. Each
factor is motivated below and the effect that the factor had
on stress placement with native English speakers in Guion
et al. (2003), which used the same method as the current
study, is reported.
Syllabic structure
Distributional descriptions of English stress patterns
suggest that the structure of syllables within a word affects
stress placement for that word. Syllable weight is an
important determinant of stress placement. A syllable is
considered heavy if it has a long vowel or is closed by a
coda consonant or consonant cluster.
A standard analysis of English predicts stress based
on vowel length and number of coda consonants (see e.g.
Chomsky and Halle, 1968; Hayes, 1982). In the case of
two-syllable nouns and verbs, the objects of investigation
in the current study, stress regularly adheres to the
following patterns, although there are many exceptions.
For two-syllable verbs, the final syllable will receive main
stress if it has a long vowel or ends in at least two
consonants. If the final syllable does not have a long vowel
or end in two or more consonants, the initial syllable is
stressed. For two-syllable nouns, the final syllable will
receive main stress only if it has a long vowel. Otherwise,
the initial syllable will have the main stress. Examples are
given in Table 1.
However, the standard analysis of word stress does not
give the whole picture of syllabic structure effects on stress
placement in English. Long vowels display a statistical
tendency to be stressed more often than short vowels,
regardless of the presence of coda consonants. Guion
et al. (2003) reported an investigation of the CELEX
lexical database (Baayen, Piepenbrock and Gulikers,
1995) whose results indicated that long vowels were
roughly twice as likely to be stressed as short vowels (60%
of long vowels vs. 35% of short vowels were stressed).

210

S. G. Guion, T. Harada and J. J. Clark
Table 1. Regular stress patterns in English nouns and verbs.
Lexical
Class

Long vowel in
final syllable

Short vowel and coda consonant
cluster in final syllable

No long vowel or coda consonant
cluster in final syllable

Verb

["tOoUn] atone
[d"vaIn] divine
[ou"beI] obey
[mAn"su...n] monsoon
[m"Si...n] machine
[k"nu...] canoe

[k"laeps] collapse
[rI"dZEkt] reject
[i..."lEkt] elect
["InsEkt] insect
["s2bdZEkt] subject
["InsEns] incense

["EdIt] edit
["kOaenslAE] cancel
["po9AmIs] promise
["baeolAE] barrel
["sIst] sister
["eIpon] apron

Noun

Thus, patterns associated with syllabic structure
consist of a complex array of variables including vowel
length, number of coda consonants and metrical structure
(i.e. position of the syllable within the word).
In the previous study (Guion et al., 2003), stress
assignment by native English speakers was affected by the
syllabic structure of the non-words, most notably vowel
length. In both production and perception experiments,
syllables with long vowels were more likely to be assigned
stress than syllables with short vowels in non-words of
otherwise comparable syllabic structure. In other words,
non-words with the syllabic structure CVVCVCC2 had
more initial stress than CVCVCC non-words, and nonwords with the syllabic structure CVCVVC had more
final stress than CVCVC non-words. A weak effect of
number of coda consonants was also observed for verbs.
Namely, non-words with the syllabic structure CVCVCC
had marginally more final stress than CVCVC nonwords. However, this effect was reversed for nouns. In
addition, the factor of syllabic structure made a significant,
independent contribution to a regression model predicting
stress placement in both the production and perception
results.
Lexical class
Another factor affecting stress placement is lexical class
(nouns vs. verbs). Sereno (1986) and Kelly and Bock
(1988) investigated the asymmetrical stress distribution
for nouns and verbs by collecting the dictionary stress
assignment of bisyllabic nouns and verbs listed in
the Francis and Kucera (1982) word frequency norms.
Considering only "pure" nouns and verbs, i.e. words that
did not have homographs in other lexical classes, Sereno
found that bisyllabic pure nouns are stressed on the initial
syllable 76% of the time, whereas bisyllabic pure verbs
are only stressed on the initial syllable 34% of the time.
Similarly, Kelly and Bock found that of the pure nouns,
94% were stressed on the initial syllable and of the pure
verbs, only 31% had stress on the initial syllable.
2

C = consonant, V = short (lax) vowel, VV = long (tense or diphthongized) vowel.

Thus, patterns associated with lexical class consist of
one variable, noun or verb, and are associated with that
variable in a simple, consistent way: Nouns are more likely
to have initial stress and verbs are more likely to have final
stress.
Guion et al. (2003) found that native English speakers
demonstrated knowledge of this distributional pattern in
both production and perception: Non-words in a noun
frame were more likely to be stressed on the initial
syllable than non-words in a verb frame, echoing the
distributional characteristics of these two lexical classes.
In addition, the factor of lexical class made a significant,
independent contribution to a regression model predicting
stress placement in both the production and perception
results.
Phonological similarity
It has been shown that the stress patterns of known words
play a role in stress assignment on new words for native
English speakers. Baker and Smith (1976) investigated
the predictions of stress placement on non-words made
by syllabic structure patterns as well as analogical
assignment of stress. They found that stress assignment
based on analogy with a similar form predicted stress in
many cases, even when the prediction went against stress
patterns based on syllabic structure.
Studies of machine learning have also demonstrated
that the stress patterns of the nearest phonological
neighbors can accurately predict stress placement on novel
words: Using exemplar-based models, Daelemans, Gillis
and Durieux (1994), and Gillis, Daelemans and Durieux
(2000) have demonstrated that a learning algorithm based
on similarity of new items to stored exemplars exhibits
the same behavior found in human language learners and
users. Namely, an exemplar-based similarity algorithm
can generalize stress patterns beyond the data on which it
was trained and assign stress to new words in a manner
similar to that found for language learners.
In regression analyses on both production and
perception data, Guion et al. (2003) found that the
location of stress on a phonologically similar real word
could predict the placement of stress on non-words by

Stress patterns in bilinguals

211

Table 2. Examples of Spanish stress patterns.
Lexical Class

Vowel final

Consonant final

Final consonant is inflectional suffix

Noun

["ico] `son'
[pa"laB|a] `word'
[kala"Basa] `squash'
["kore] `He/she/it runs'
[men"diVa] `He/she/it begs'
[kores"ponde] `He/she/it
corresponds/belongs'

[tam"bor] `drum'
[ove"|ol] `overalls'
[felisi"DaD] `happiness'
[ko"rer] `to run'
[mendi"Var] `to beg'
[korespon"der] `to
correspond/belong'

["icos] `sons'
[pa"laB|as] `words'
[kala"Basas] `squashes'
["koreN] `They run'
[men"diVaN] `They beg'
[kores"pondeN] `They
correspond/belong'

Verb

native English speakers. Importantly, the stress pattern
of the phonologically similar word predicted stress
independently from the factors of syllabic structure and
lexical class. This indicates that a similarity metric may
operate along dimensions of phonological similarity that
are independent of lexical class and syllabic structure.
These dimensions of phonological similarity may be at
the level of the individual exemplar or of the segmental
pattern shared by the real and non-words.
Spanish stress patterns
A brief description of Spanish stress patterns is presented
in this section to allow for an evaluation of the Spanish-
English bilinguals' results. Specifically, the description of
Spanish stress patterns is needed to determine possible
transfer effects as well as to determine which English
patterns would be novel to a Spanish speaker learning
English.
In Spanish, the normal and most common stress pattern
is for stress to fall on the final syllable of a word if
it ends in a consonant and on the penultimate syllable
if the final syllable ends in a vowel. Notable exceptions
include some inflectional endings (i.e. nominal plural /-s/
and verbal third person plural /-n/), which do not condition
stress on the final syllable. Example words are presented
in Table 2. There are other stress patterns that occur
much less frequently. Harris (1992) reports on frequency
counts made from dictionaries, newspapers and novels and
reports that the stress pattern outlined here is by far the
most common. Taking precautions to include only words
for which alternate stress patterns were possible, Harris
found that from 85% to 95% of the words in the corpora
followed the regular stress pattern.
An examination of two databases revealed that most
words in Spanish end in a vowel. In a lexical database,
Faitelson-Weiser (1987, p. 178) reports that out of a
corpus of 180,975 Spanish words, 131,557 (73%) ended
in a vowel. An analysis of a database of Spanish syllable
types developed by Alvarez, Carreiras and de Vega (1992)
found that the token frequency of final syllables ending
in a vowel, in words of two syllables or longer, was

roughly twice that of final syllables ending in a consonant
(717,485 vs. 436,844). Thus, given the regular pattern of
Spanish stress in which words ending in a vowel will have
penultimate stress, most words of two syllables or more
will have penultimate stress.
If this distributional pattern of stress placement forms
part of the Spanish-speakers' knowledge of their language
(which seems likely given the evidence that English
speakers have knowledge about distributional patterns in
their language) the bilingual participants in this study
may transfer this pattern and use it to determine stress
assignment on the English non-words in the study. If this
were the case, more initial than final stress placement
would be expected.
It is also noteworthy that all lexical classes show the
same adherence to the normal stress pattern. In other
words, it is not the case that nouns are more or less likely
to deviate from the norm and use an alternate stress
pattern than verbs are (Harris, 1992).3 Thus, if evidence
of knowledge of the statistical distribution of stress
placement across the lexical classes of noun and verb
in English were found for the Spanish-English bilinguals,
it would indicate that learning of the English distribution
had taken place and that it would not be a transfer of
knowledge from Spanish.
Experimental hypotheses
The investigation reported here was designed to determine
whether early learners (who began to learn English before
the age of seven) and late learners (who began to learn
English after the age of 14) are able to learn English stress
patterns equally. These cut-off ages were chosen based
on Long's (1990) review which found that phonological
3

It should be mentioned, however, that there are some noun-verb pairs
that, similar to English, differ only in stress placement: the noun has
the stress one syllable to the left (Harris, 1969). For example the
verb [fo|"mula] `he/she/it formulates' has the nominal counterpart
["fo|mula] `formula'. In this case, the noun displays a non-typical
stress pattern. On the other hand, many noun-verb pairs do not have a
stress shift, both showing the normal stress pattern. For example, take
[em"biDja],which means both `he/she/it envies' and the noun `envy'.

212

S. G. Guion, T. Harada and J. J. Clark

acquisition was least affected by delays in language
exposure before the age of seven and age of acquisition
effects were seemingly inevitable after the age of 12.
Some stress patterns, such as those associated with
syllabic structure, are quite complex and others, such as
the distributional tendency for nouns to have initial stress
and verbs to have final stress, are simpler. Of interest
is whether the complexity of the pattern is predictive of
second language learners' ability to abstract and learn the
given pattern and whether early and late learners show
equal ability to acquire simple versus complex patterns of
stress placement.
Given the results of the Davis and Kelly (1997) study
in which no age of acquisition effects on stress patterns
based on lexical class were found, it is predicted that
both the early and later learners in the current study will
demonstrate knowledge of the relatively simple lexical
class stress patterns. The mixed results from studies
investigating the relatively more complex stress patterns
related to syllabic structure suggest that these pattern may
be less likely to be acquired, especially by late learners.
Another question addressed by this study is whether
learners of English will show analogical extension of
stress patterns from individual lexical items to nonword experimental stimuli and whether such analogical
extension is used by both early and late bilinguals.
As associative learning processes, such as analogy, are
hypothesized to be available to learners of all ages (see e.g.
Neville, 1999), both early and late learners are predicted
to show analogical effects.
Finally, two experiments, one assessing production and
the other perception of stress patterns, were conducted. It
is hypothesized that the perceptual experiment may reveal
knowledge of stress patterns not found in the production
data because of the nature of the tasks. The perception task
requires only preference judgments and thus places fewer
demands on the processing system than the production
task, which also requires formation and production of a
non-word.
Experiment 1: Production
In this experiment, three groups of participants were asked
to produce two syllable non-words in both noun and
verb sentence frames. The effects of lexical class and
syllabic structure of the four non-word stimulus types
were investigated.
Method
Participants
Thirty adults were paid to participate in the experiment.
None of the participants reported being diagnosed with
any language or reading disorders and all passed a
pure tone hearing screening in both ears from 500

to 4000 Hz at octave intervals (26 at 20 dB and 4 at
25 dB). The participants were recruited based on native
language and language experience and divided into three
groups (n = 10): Native English, Early Spanish-English
Bilingual and Late Spanish-English Bilingual.
All participants in the Native English group learned
English as a native language and no other language was
spoken in the home during childhood. Most had some
history of foreign language study in high school and/or
college but none had lived abroad for more than three
months at a time. The bilingual participants all spoke
Spanish as their first language and had lived in the United
States for at least five years. The Early Bilinguals had
begun learning English at the age of 2.5 to 6 years. The
age of acquisition for the Late Bilinguals ranged from 15
to 33 years old and was determined by age of first massive
exposure to English when they moved to the United States.
Speakers in both bilingual groups used English regularly
on a daily basis at the time of the study. On average, the
Early Bilingual group used English 85%, while the Late
Bilinguals used English 75% of the time (see Table 3).
It was important to the goals of the study that
the bilingual participants in the two groups were of
roughly equal proficiency in English. Since the Early
Bilinguals were likely to be highly proficient, the Late
Bilinguals needed to be quite proficient as well. To
this end, late bilinguals with long lengths of residence
(12.9 years on average) and high levels of education (all
had at least some college in the United States) were
recruited. In addition, a standardized test of English
proficiency, the Test of Adolescent and Adult Language
(TOAL), was administered to all participants. This test
was chosen due to its ability to test high-proficiency
English-speakers at adult levels (Hammill, Brown, Larsen
and Weiderholt, 1994). Two of the TOAL subtests, those
focusing on listening vocabulary and listening grammar,
were administered. The two bilingual groups performed
comparably on the TOAL tests. Table 1 presents the
results. There was no significant difference between the
two bilingual groups for the TOAL Test 1 [F(1,18) = 1.99,
p > .05] or Test 2 [F(1,18) = 0.34, p > .05]. Note also
that scores for all three groups were well below the ceiling
score of 35.
An additional proficiency measure was devised to test
specifically the ability of the Spanish-English bilinguals
to correctly place stress on real English words. Eighteen
words with stress patterns consistent with regular English
stress patterns and 18 words of the same syllabic structure,
but which were not consistent with the regular patterns,
were selected. The words in the two groups did not differ
in their token frequency. Appendix I contains a list of
these words and their frequency information.
The words were presented orthographically (i.e. in
English spelling) and the bilingual participants were asked
to first rate the confidence of their knowledge of the

Stress patterns in bilinguals

213

Table 3. Information on the participants.
Group

Sex (F/M)

AOAa

LORb

Agec

TOAL1d

TOAL2e

Educ.f

English useg

Native English
Early Bilinguals
Late Bilinguals

5/5
6/4
5/5

0.0
3.7
21.5

24.9
23.4
12.9

24.9
25.7
33.2

29.8
24.6
21.0

28.4
22.1
23.8

14.8
15.8
15.6

-
84.5%
75.0%

AOA = Mean age of English acquisition as defined by immersion in an English speaking environment (in years).
LOR = Mean length of residence in the United States (in years).
c
Age = Mean age at time of testing (in years).
d
TOAL1 = Mean score on subtest 1 of the Test of Adolescent and Adult Language-3 testing listening vocabulary (raw score out of
35 possible).
e
TOAL2 = Mean score on subtest 2 of the Test of Adolescent and Adult Language-3 testing listening grammar (raw score out of 35
possible).
f
Educ. = Mean years of education. A high school degree was counted as 12 years, a Bachelor's degree as 16 years, a Master's degree
as 18 years, and a Ph.D. was counted as 20 years. Partial years studying toward a degree were counted up to the maximum for that
degree.
g
English Use = Mean self-reported estimated overall use of English in the participants' daily life currently. Data not collected from
the native English speakers.
a

b

Table 4. Mean proportion of correct stress placements
on known real English words.

Group

Words consistent
with regular
stress patterns

Words inconsistent
with regular
stress patterns

Early Bilinguals
Late Bilinguals

.99
.98

.98
.96

word's meaning and of their ability to pronounce the word
on five-point scales.4 Then, the participants were recorded reading each of the words in the sentence frame
"I said ___ this time". The words were later coded
for correct stress placement. Only words with a rating
of 5 on both scales were considered in the analysis.
Table 4 presents the average proportion of correct stress
placement by group for each of the two word types. Note
that both groups of bilinguals display high accuracy (96%
or higher) of stress placement on known English words.
The results from this proficiency test indicate that both
groups of bilingual speakers are highly accurate in stress
placement on known English words, whether or not they
are consistent with the regular stress patterns.
Materials
The stimuli consisted of 40 two-syllable non-words
presented as isolated stressed syllables. There were four
types of non-words, each with a different syllabic structure
(see Table 5). Take, for example, a non-word of Type 1
4

A confidence rating was used instead of a vocabulary test because
familiarity with the word's pronunciation was of utmost importance.
It is possible that someone could know the meaning of a word, yet not
know how to pronounce it.

Table 5. The non-words used in Experiments 1 and 2.
Type 1
CVV CVCC

Type 2
CV CVCC

Type 3
CV CVC

Type 4
CV CVVC

beI tIst
tu... kIps
taI gEpt
poU tIst
gi... kIps
poU bEkt
tu... mInz
taI mInz
beI bEkt
gi... gEpt

dE kIps
nI gEpt
kI mInz
sE tIst
bI bEkt
sE bEkt
dE mInz
nI kIps
kI gEpt
bI tIst

nI lEt
dE sIn
sE lIn
bI tEs
sE gEt
dE lEt
nI sIn
kI gEt
bI lIn
kI tEs

nI li...t
dE gu...t
bI teIs
bI toUs
kI gi...n
sE li...t
nI gu...t
kI teIs
dE toUs
sE gi...n

(CVV.CVCC), [beI tIst]. The first syllable began with a
single consonant [b], then had a long vowel [eI], while the
second syllable began with a single consonant [t], then
had a short vowel [I], and ended in two consonants [st].
The syllabic structures of the non-words are all possible
and frequent in English. However, Spanish does not allow
two consonants at the end of a syllable as some of the nonwords have (see Types 1 and 2). In addition, non-words
were produced in an American English accent, which is
unlike Spanish in many ways. Most notably, there is a
longer voice onset time (aspiration) for voiceless stops
(i.e. [p t k]) in English than Spanish and the vowel qualities
differ as well. Thus the non-words are more English- than
Spanish-like.
The individual syllables making up the non-words
were produced by a native American English speaker
and recorded on digital audio tape (DAT) with a high
quality microphone in the frame "Now I say ____". Thus

214

S. G. Guion, T. Harada and J. J. Clark

each syllable was produced with sentential pitch accent
and stress, creating an equal degree of stress and clarity
in production for all syllables. The productions were
digitized at 22.05 kHz (16 bit) on a personal computer.
The syllables were then excised from the frame sentence
and normalized to 50% peak intensity. This created
individual stimuli of the same intensity. The same speaker
also recorded the phrases "I'd like to" and "I'd like a".
The final "to" and "a" were produced in a reduced form
(i.e. [t] and []). These phrases were also digitized and
normalized. The phrase "I'd like to ___" will be referred
to as the verb frame and the phrase "I'd like a ___" will
be referred to as the noun frame.
Procedure
The three groups of participants were asked to concatenate
words of four syllabic structure types (see Table 5),
presented as isolated, stressed syllables, into a single word
and say it in a frame sentence. Each of the non-words was
presented twice, once with the noun frame and once with
the verb frame. Two pseudo-randomized, counterbalanced
blocks were used, making a total of 80 trials. Each nonword was presented only once in each block. Half of the
productions in each block were in the noun frame, half in
the verb frame. There was a short distracter task between
the two blocks. Participants were given some practice
trials using non-test items before the first block.
Stimulus presentation was controlled by the software
SPARCS (Smith, 1997) on a personal computer and played
over high quality loud speakers in a sound attenuated
room. Participants adjusted the presentation volume to a
comfortable level before testing began. The participants
wore a head mounted-microphone and their responses
were recorded on DAT tape. For each trial, the participants
were first presented with a frame sentence. Presentation of
the frame was both aural and visual. After a 500 ms delay
the two stressed, isolated syllables composing the nonword were presented with a 500 ms inter-stimulus interval.
Presentation of non-words was aural only; no visual (i.e.
no orthographic) representation was given. Participants
could replay the trial if they wished. After responding,
they pushed a button to continue to the next trial.
The participants were instructed to take the two
syllables, keep them in the same order and make a
single word from them. They were instructed to produce
all the sounds of the syllables they heard. Additionally,
participants were asked to say the word in the carrier
phrase that had just been presented. They were asked to
say the carrier phrase in the same way they had heard it. If
the final word in the frame ("to" or "a") was produced
with stress during the practice block, the participant
was stopped and corrected. All participants could easily
produce the carrier phrase in the desired manner. It was
important that all the non-words were produced in the
same metrical frame because of potential confounding

effects of the frame on stress placement. The participants
were also told to take their time and consider all possible
responses.

Coding and reliability
A native English speaker listened to the taped responses
and coded them as having either first or second syllable
stress. Some of the non-words were produced with
segmental content different from that in the stimulus.
If the substitution did not change the syllable structure
(e.g. [veIbEkt] for [beIbEkt]), the response was counted.
However, if the substitution did change the syllable
structure (e.g. [bEbEkt] for [beIbEkt]), the response was
counted as missing. Approximately 1% of the responses
were discarded because they did not reproduce the syllable
pattern presented to the participant.
Rater reliability was assessed by recoding a subset of
the data. Ten responses were arbitrarily chosen (to equally
sample all the non-words) from each of the 30 participants,
for a total of 300 items. These responses were digitized and
removed from their sentential context. The same native
English speaker, as well as another native English speaker,
blindly recoded these responses. The intraclass correlation
coefficient (McGraw and Wong, 1996) for the two ratings
done by the same rater was quite high ( = .96). This
indicates that the rater coded stress placement with a high
degree of reliability. The high correlation also indicates
that bias was minimal as the second coding was done
blindly. When the ratings of the two raters were submitted
to a single measure intraclass correlation (which indicates
the reliability when a single rater is used, as was the
case here), the correlation coefficient was also high
( = .86), indicating that the use of one rater was highly
reliable.

Statistical analysis
The scores from the production task were submitted
to a mixed-design analysis of variance (ANOVA) with
three factors: Group (3), Lexical Class (2) and Syllabic
Structure (4). The three levels for the factor Group are
Native English, Early Bilingual and Late Bilingual. The
two levels for the factor Lexical Class are word produced
in a noun frame and word produced in a verb frame. The
four levels for the factor Syllabic Structure are defined as
the four non-word types in Table 5. For the subject (F1)
and item (F2) analyses, repeated measures were used on
Lexical Class, as the same non-word was produced both in
a noun frame and in a verb frame. For the subject analysis,
repeated measures were used on Syllabic Structure as well,
in order to compare the productions by a given participant
across the four non-word types.

Stress patterns in bilinguals
Production: Native English Monolinguals

Mean Proportion Initial Stress

1.0
Noun Frame
Verb Frame

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0
CVVCVCC
Type 1

CVCVCC
Type 2

CVCVC
Type 3

CVCVVC
Type 4

Production: Early Spanish-English Bilinguals

Mean Proportion Initial Stress

1.0
Noun Frame
Verb Frame

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0
CVVCVCC
Type 1

CVCVCC CVCVC
Type 3
Type 2

CVCVVC
Type 4

Production: Late Spanish-English Bilinguals

Mean Proportion Initial Stress

1.0
Noun Frame
Verb Frame

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0
CVVCVCC
Type 1

CVCVCC
Type 2

CVCVC CVCVVC
Type 3
Type 4

Figure 1. Mean proportion and standard error of initial
stress productions for the three groups (n = 10). Four
non-word types (10 items for each type) with different
syllabic structures were produced in noun (black bar) and
verb (gray bar) sentence frames.

Results
Figure 1 presents the mean proportion of initial syllable
stress for the four non-word types, two sentence frames

215

and three groups. Note that non-words produced in a noun
frame were more often produced with initial syllable stress
than those in a verb frame. Also a long vowel in the
initial syllable (Type 1) conditioned more initial syllable
stress, whereas a long vowel in the final syllable (Type
4) conditioned more final stress. In addition, the size
of the effects is smaller for the Late Bilingual Group
and overall this group has more initial syllable stress
productions.
Because some of the scores were greater than .90 or
less than .10, the proportions were arcsine transformed,
producing scores that were normally distributed and had a
constant variance (see e.g. Woods, Fletcher and Hughes,
1986, p. 220). The transformed scores were then submitted
to a mixed-design ANOVA with three factors: Group (3),
Syllabic Structure (4) and Lexical class (2).
The main effects of Group [F1(2,27) = 5.42,
p < .05; F2(2,108) = 32.38, p < .05], Syllabic Structure [F1(3,81) = 50.63, p < .05; F2(3,108) = 40.84,
p < .05] and Lexical Class [F1(1,27) = 50.31, p < .05;
F2(1,108) = 152.93, p < .05] were all significant, as
was the three-way interaction [F1(6,81) = 2.46, p < .05;
F2(6,108) = 2.59, p < .05]. (Note that all two-way
interactions were also significant.) This indicates that the
effects of Syllabic Structure and Lexical Class (and their
interaction) affected stress placement differently across
the three groups.
To further investigate these effects, separate one-way
ANOVAs investigating the effect of Lexical Class for
each of the four types, for each of the three groups were
performed. Then separate one-way ANOVAs, and pairwise comparisons, investigating the effect of Syllabic
Structure for each lexical class for each of the three groups
were performed.
The effect of Lexical Class was significant ( p < .05) for
each of the four syllabic structure types for both the Native
English group (F-values ranged from 13.8 to 42.39) and
the Early Bilingual group (F-values ranged from 5.68 to
73.13). In the case of the Late Bilingual group, while
the trend in the expected direction was found for all four
types, the effect of Lexical class only reached significance
for Type 3 in the item [F2(1,9) = 5.45, p < .05] but not the
subject [F2(1,9) = 3.46, p > .05] analysis.
The effect of Syllabic Structure was significant
( p < .05) for all groups for words produced in both
the noun and verb sentence frames (F-values ranged
from 9.83 to 17.97). However, the pair-wise comparisons
revealed differences between the groups. In the case of
the words produced in the noun frame, both the Native
English and Early Bilingual groups were found to have
more initial syllable stress responses on Type 1 than the
other three types (Tukey's p < .05). The Late Bilingual
group, on the other hand, showed a different pattern. Initial
syllable stress responses for Type 4 were less than the other
three types (Tukey's p < .05). In the case of the words

216

S. G. Guion, T. Harada and J. J. Clark

produced in the verb frame, both the Native English and
Early Bilingual groups were found to have more initial
syllable stress responses for Types 1 and 3 than Types
2 and 4 (Tukey's p < .05). On the other hand, the Late
Bilingual group had fewer initial stress responses for Type
4 than the other three types (Tukey's p < .05).

Another difference between the late bilinguals and the
other two groups was in the greater number of overall
initial stress productions for this group. We suggest that
this may be a transfer effect from Spanish and may
reflect the overall preponderance of penultimate stress
found across the Spanish lexicon (as discussed in the
introduction).

Discussion
The results from the native English speakers largely
replicate the findings from Guion et al. (2003) in which
17 native English speakers were tested on the same
protocol. As in the previous study, non-words produced
in a noun frame were found to have more initial syllable
stress than those produced in a verb frame. The syllabic
structure effects due to vowel length were also replicated.
Namely, for both noun frame and verb frame productions,
more initial stress was found for CVVCVCC nonwords (Type 1) than CVCVCC (Type 2) non-words. In
addition, the verb frame productions showed more final
syllable stress for CVCVVC non-words (Type 4) than
CVCVC (Type 3) non-words. The previous study found
this last effect for nouns as well. The marginal coda
consonant effect found for verbs in the previous study was
more robust here. Namely, the verb frame productions
had more final syllable stress for CVCVCC non-words
(Type 2) than CVCVC (Type 3) non-words. The replication of these effects provides strong evidence that
native English speakers use lexical class and syllabic
structure (i.e. vowel length and number of coda consonants) to determine stress placement during the
production of non-words.
The early Spanish-English bilinguals showed the same
effects of lexical class and syllabic structure on stress
placement in the non-words that the native English
speakers did. This indicates that the early bilinguals used
lexical class, vowel length and number of coda consonants
in a way similar to the native English speakers when
assigning stress to non-words in a production task.
The late Spanish-English bilinguals, on the other hand,
showed differences from the other two groups. First, the
effect of lexical class was only found for CVCVC nonwords (Type 3). This effect was found for all four types
for the other two groups. Second, the effects of syllabic
structure for the pair-wise comparisons were different.
Namely, the initial long vowel effect (more initial stress for
CVVCVCC than CVCVCC) was not observed, nor was
the coda consonant effect (more final stress for CVCVCC
than CVCVC). The final long vowel effect was, however,
observed in both the noun and verb sentence frames.
CVCVVC non-words (Type 4) had more final stress than
any of the other three non-word types. Thus, the late
Spanish-English bilinguals showed weaker and somewhat
different effects of both lexical class and syllabic structure
than the other groups.

Experiment 2: Perception
In this experiment, the same three groups from
Experiment 1 participated. They were asked to report
their preference for initial or final syllable stress on two
syllable non-words (the same ones used in the previous
experiment) that were aurally presented in noun and
verb sentence frames. The effects of lexical class and
syllabic structure on the four non-word stimulus types
were investigated.
Method
Participants
The same 30 people, divided into the three groups of
Native English, Early Spanish-English Bilingual and Late
Spanish-English Bilingual, participated.
Materials
The same 40 non-words used in Experiment 1, listed in
Table 5, were produced with stress on the initial and final
syllable in each of the carrier frames "I'd like a ___"
and "I'd like to ___" making a total of 160 sentences.
The "a" or "to" of each phrase was produced in a reduced
manner. The same speaker used in Experiment 1 produced
these sentences. The productions were recorded on DAT
tape. Then they were digitized at 22.05 kHz (16 bit) on
a personal computer. Each phrase was edited into its
own file. These files were then normalized to 50% peak
intensity. Multiple productions of each sentence were
produced and those considered to be the most similar in
rate and speaking style by another native English speaker
were selected for use as stimuli.
Procedure
All participants were run on Experiment 2 after finishing
Experiment 1. Since the same words were used in both
experiments, it is possible that practice effects may have
influenced the results of Experiment 2. However, since
the experiments were presented in the same order to all
participants, it is likely that any such effects would have
affected all participants equally.
Participants were asked to listen to the prerecorded
phrases in pairs that varied only in the stress placement
on the non-word. In a given trial, the same sentence frame
(noun or verb) was presented. They were instructed to
listen to the two sentences and indicate which one sounded

Stress patterns in bilinguals
the most like a real English sentence to them. For example,
consider the two representative trials below.




"beIbekt]
beI"bekt]

(pause)

Example Trial 2
[aId
[aId

"laIk
"laIk

t
t

bI"lIn]
"bIlIn]

(pause)

Each target non-word was presented in two trials, once
in a noun frame and once in a verb frame. Two pseudorandomized, counterbalanced blocks were used, making a
total of 80 trials. Each non-word was presented only once
in each block. Half of the productions in each block were
in a noun frame, half in a verb frame. The order of initial
or final syllable stress within a trial was also controlled.
For a given non-word, the order of stress presentation
remained constant for both the noun frame and verb
frame trials. For each of the four non-word types, five
of the non-words were presented with initial stress, then
final stress. Conversely, the other five were presented with
final stress, then initial stress. There was a break of a few
minutes between the two blocks. Participants were given
some practice trials using non-test items before the first
block.
Stimulus presentation and response recording was
controlled by the software SPARCS (Smith, 1997) on
a personal computer and played over high quality
headphones in a sound attenuated room. Participants
adjusted the presentation volume to a comfortable level
before testing began. For each trial, the participants were
presented two sentences with a 1500 ms inter-stimulus
interval. They responded by indicating which sentence
they preferred by pushing a button labeled "first" or
"second". This brought up the next trial after a 2000 ms
delay. No repetition of the trial was allowed.
Statistical analysis
The same statistical design used for the production data
was used for the perception data. Briefly, the scores
from the perception task were submitted to a mixeddesign ANOVA with three factors: Group (3), Syllabic
Structure (4) and Lexical Class (2) with repeated measures
on Lexical Class for the subject (F1) and item (F2)
analyses, and repeated measures on Syllabic Structure as
well for the subject analysis.

Mean Proportion Initial Stress

"laIk
"laIk

Perception: Native English Monolinguals
Noun Frame
Verb Frame

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0
CVVCVCC CVCVCC
Type 2
Type 1

CVCVC
Type 3

CVCVVC
Type 4

Perception: Early Spanish-English Bilinguals
1.0
Mean Proportion Initial Stress

[aId
[aId

Noun Frame
Verb Frame

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0
CVVCVCC CVCVCC
Type 1
Type 2

CVCVC
Type 3

CVCVVC
Type 4

Perception: Late Spanish-English Bilinguals
1.0
Mean Proportion Initial Stress

Example Trial 1

1.0

217

Noun Frame
Verb Frame

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0
CVVCVCC CVCVCC CVCVC
Type 1
Type 2
Type 3

CVCVVC
Type 4

Figure 2. Mean proportion and standard error of initial
stress preference for the three groups (n = 10). Four
non-word types (10 items for each type) with different
syllabic structures were presented in noun (black bar) and
verb (gray bar) sentence frames.

Results
The mean proportions of initial stress responses for each
group are presented in Figure 2. Note that, as was the case
with the production data, nouns tend to have more initial
stress responses than verbs. The effect is largest for the

Late Bilinguals. In addition, note that the pattern of initial
stress preferences across the non-word syllabic structure
types is quite similar for the Native English and Early
Bilingual groups. The Late Bilinguals, on the other hand,

218

S. G. Guion, T. Harada and J. J. Clark

show a different pattern. Also, the Late Bilinguals have
more initial stress responses overall.
The proportions of initial stress were arcsine transformed (because some of the scores were above .90 and
some below .10) and then submitted to a mixed design
ANOVA with three factors: Group (3), Syllabic Structure
(4), and Lexical Class (2).
The main effects of Group [F1(2,27) = 4.53,
p < .05; F2(2,108) = 37.97, p < .05], Syllabic Structure [F1(3,81) = 13.05, p < .05; F2(3,108) = 11.88,
p < .05] and Lexical Class [F1(1,27) = 17.46, p < .05;
F2(1,108) = 43.48, p < .05] were all significant. The
two-way interactions of Group and Lexical class
[F1(2,27) = 1.01, p > .05; F2(2,108) = 4.14, p < .05] and
Group and Syllabic Structure [F1(6,81) = 1.96, p > .05;
F2(6,108) = 3.2, p < .05] were significant for the item
analysis but not the subject analysis. No other two-way
interactions were significant. The three-way interaction
was significant for the item analysis [F2(6,108) = 2.58,
p < .05] but was not significant for the subject analysis
[F1(6,81) = 1.42, p > .05].
As the three-way interaction was not robust, only
the two-way interactions (found for the item analyses)
of Group with Lexical Class and Group with Syllabic
Structure were explored further. Separate ANOVAs
testing the effect of Lexical Class for each group across the
combined syllable structure types were performed. Then
separate ANOVAs and pair-wise comparisons testing
the effect of Syllabic Structure for each group on the
combined noun and verb frame responses were performed.
The effect of Lexical Class was found to be significant
for all three groups: Native English [F2(1,39) = 9.87,
p < .05], Early Bilingual [F2(1,39) = 7.59, p < .05] and
Late Bilingual [F2(1,39) = 26.39, p < .05]. The source
of the interaction seems to lie in the magnitude of the
effect across the groups. Both the Native English and
Early Bilinguals had about the same proportion greater
first syllable responses in the noun than the verb frame
(.11 greater for the Native English and .10 greater for the
Early Bilinguals). The Late Bilinguals, on the other hand,
showed a larger effect (.24 greater for the noun than the
verb frame).
The effect of Syllabic Structure was significant
for all three groups: Native English [F2(3,36) = 8.33,
p < .05], Early Bilingual [F2(3,36) = 4.72, p < .05] and
Late Bilingual [F2(1,39) = 3.78, p < .05]. However, the
pair-wise comparisons revealed differences between the
groups. In the case of the Native English group, Tukey's
comparisons ( p < .05) on the combined noun and verb
frame data showed more initial syllable stress preferences
for Type 1 than Types 2 and 4 and more for Type 3 than
Type 4. The Early Bilingual group showed more initial
syllable stress preferences for Type 1 than Types 2 and 4,
and the Late Bilingual group showed more initial syllable
stress preferences for Type 3 than Type 4 (Tukey's p < .05).

Discussion
The perception results of the native English speakers
replicate the findings from Guion et al. (2003) in which
17 native English speakers were tested on the same
perception protocol. Non-words presented in a noun frame
were found to have greater initial syllable stress preference
than those presented in a verb frame. For the noun frame
and verb frame presentations combined, initial stress
was more likely to be preferred for CVVCVCC nonwords (Type 1) than CVCVCC (Type 2) non-words. In
addition, there was greater final syllable stress preference
for CVCVVC non-words (Type 4) than CVCVC (Type 3)
non-words. As was the case in the previous study, the
coda consonant effect that was found in the production
experiment was not found in the perception experiment.
The early Spanish-English bilinguals showed effects
of lexical class similar to the native English speakers.
They differed, however, on the pair-wise comparisons
investigating the effect of syllabic structure. As was the
case for the native English speakers, more initial stress
was found for CVVCVCC non-words than CVCVCC
non-words. However, the final long vowel effect (more
final syllable stress for CVCVVC than CVCVC) was not
found, although a trend in this direction was present (see
Figure 2).
The late Spanish-English bilinguals showed a stronger
effect of lexical class than both the native English speakers
and the early Spanish-English bilinguals. They also
differed from the native English speakers on the pair-wise
comparisons investigating the effect of syllabic structure.
In this case, the initial long vowel effect was not found,
but the final long vowel effect was.
These results indicate that both the early and late
Spanish-English bilinguals differ somewhat from native
English speakers in the syllabic structure effect. In
addition, the late bilinguals showed a stronger effect
of lexical class than the native English speakers. This
may indicate that the late bilinguals were over-relying on
lexical class to make judgments about stress preference.
As was the case with the production data, late bilinguals
had more overall initial stress preferences. Again, we
suggest that this may be a transfer effect from Spanish.
In sum, the early bilinguals differed only slightly from
the native English speakers in their preference of stress
placement: The final long vowel effect was not found. The
late bilinguals, however, differed in more ways from the
native English speakers: The initial long vowel effect was
not found, the lexical class effect was stronger, and there
was an overall greater preference for initial stress.

Regression analyses
In this section, the results of six logistic regression
analyses designed to investigate the effects of lexical class,

Stress patterns in bilinguals
syllabic structure, and the influence of phonologically
similar real words on stress placement for the three
groups are reported. These analyses provide additional
information to the ANOVAs presented above, as the effect
of phonologically similar words is factored in, allowing
for an assessment of its unique predictive power on stress
placement.
Dependent variables
The dependent variables used in the analyses are the
results from Experiments 1 and 2 just reported. The
individual data points are used and are thus binary (i.e.
initial or final stress). A separate regression was done on
the production and perception results for each of the three
groups.
Independent variables
Three binary independent variables were used as
predictors for each analysis: Syllabic Structure, Lexical
Class and Phonological Similarity.
Syllabic structure
The first predictor variable was the stress placement
predicted by the distribution of stress across different
syllable types. As presented in the introduction, long
vowels seem to be the greatest attractors of stress, followed
by coda consonant clusters, followed by a singleton coda
consonant. The stress placement was predicted in the
following manner. If the non-word has a syllable with
a long vowel, it is stressed. If there is no long vowel,
a syllable with a coda cluster is stressed. If there is no
such syllable, the syllable with a single coda consonant is
stressed. Thus, a unique prediction (initial or final stress)
was made for each of the four non-word types.
Lexical class
The second independent variable was based on the
statistical distribution of main stress between nouns and
verbs. Nouns were predicted to have initial main stress
and verbs were predicted to have final main stress.
Phonological similarity
The third predictor variable was made up of the results
from a word similarity task that each of the 30 participants
did. For this variable, stress is predicted on the initial
or final syllable based on the stress placement of a
phonologically similar real word collected from each
participant for each of the non-words.
The purpose of the word similarity task was to gather
information on main stress placement of real words that
were phonologically similar to the non-words used in the
study and to use the results as an independent variable
in the regression analyses described here. It is likely that
different participants would consider different words to

219

be phonologically similar to the non-words, especially
since the participants had different language backgrounds.
Thus this task was employed to empirically determine
phonologically similar words for each of the participants
individually.
The 30 participants heard the same 40 non-words used
in Experiments 1 and 2 presented as isolated syllables. A
ten-second interval followed the presentation in which
time the participants listed any phonologically similar
words they thought of. Specifically, they were asked:
"Does the way they sound remind you of any real words?"
It seemed that the participants were able to perform this
task, as the vast majority of their responses had obvious
segmental commonalities with the stimuli.
The non-words were presented in 40 trials in a single
randomized block. Stimulus presentation was controlled
by the same software used in the Experiments 1 and 2
and played over high quality loud speakers at a
comfortable listening level in a sound attenuated room.
The participants wore a head mounted microphone and
their answers were recorded on DAT tape. For each trial,
two isolated stressed syllables composing the non-word
were presented with a 500 ms inter-stimulus interval. No
repetition of the trial was possible. There were ten seconds
between trials.
A native English speaker listened to the taped responses
and coded them as having either initial or final stress.
The placement of stress was determined by the perceived
location of main stress in the word as the participant
actually produced it. It is unlikely that judgments could
have been biased, as the rater did not know the speaker's
responses for each word from Experiments 1 and 2.
Only the stress of responses for words with more than
one syllable were recorded. Most words were disyllabic
but a few (around 5% of the cases) were longer. In these
cases, the stress was transcribed as initial syllable stress
for stress on the initial syllable and as final syllable stress
for stress on the second syllable. As it turned out, no
words with primary stress after the first two syllables were
produced. Participants sometimes responded with more
than one word per trial. In the majority of cases, the second
and third word had the same stress as the first word. In
a small number of cases (about 2%), the second word
received a different stress than the first. In these cases,
the stress of the first word that was said was recorded.
Participants produced words in both English and Spanish.
In the case of the Native English speakers, 258
responses were recorded out of a possible 400 (40 nonwords x 10 participants). On average, responses for 26
out of 40 trials were recorded per participant. The Early
Bilinguals produced 244 out of 400 responses, 90% of
which were in English and 10% in Spanish. On average,
responses for 24 out of 40 trials were recorded per
participant. The Late Bilinguals produced 235 out of 400
responses, 68% of which were in English and 32% in

220

S. G. Guion, T. Harada and J. J. Clark

Spanish. On average, responses for 23 out of 40 trials
were recorded per participant.
There were a wide variety of responses to any
given target non-word, indicating considerable variation
in phonological associations with real words among
the participants. These results highlight the need for
individualized determination of phonologically similar
words for a given participant. Well over 90% of the
responses had obvious segmental similarities to the nonwords, indicating that the participants were basing their
responses on phonological similarities (and not, e.g.
semantic associations).
Results
Production data
A logistic regression analysis was performed on stress
placement of the non-words produced in Experiment 1
as outcome and three predictor variables: Syllabic Structure, Lexical Class and Phonological Similarity. A total
of 800 cases were possible for each group (40 words x
10 participants x 2 lexical classes). However, some data
points were missing for the predictor Phonological
Similarity because participants did not respond with a
real word in the phonological similarity task for a given
trial and some data points were missing from the outcome
variable because participants produced a given non-word
with a different syllable structure than the stimulus in
the production experiment. Details for missing values are
given for each group below.
For the Native English group, after deletion of 284
cases with missing values on Phonological Similarity, 516
cases were available for analysis. A test of the full model
with all three predictors against a constant-only model was
statistically reliable, [ 2 (3) = 97.5, p < .05], indicating
that the predictors, as a set, reliably distinguished between
initial and final stress on the production data with a good
model fit [Nagelkerke R2 = .23]. Overall classification
was moderately good. On the basis of the three predictor
variables, correct classification rates were 57% for initial
and 80% for final stress, with an overall success rate
of 70%.
For the Early Spanish-English Bilingual group, after
deletion of 316 cases with missing values (312 on
Phonological Similarity, 4 on the dependent variable),
484 cases were available for analysis. A test of the full
model was statistically reliable, [ 2 (3) = 80.7, p < .05],
with a good model fit [Nagelkerke R2 = .21]. Overall
classification was somewhat weaker for initial stress than
for the Native English group. On the basis of the three
predictor variables, correct classification rates were 49%
for initial and 82% for final stress, with an overall success
rate of 70%.
For the Late Spanish-English Bilingual group, after
deletion of 340 cases with missing values (330 on

Phonological Similarity, 10 from the dependent variable),
460 cases were available for analysis. A test of the full
model was statistically reliable, [ 2 (3) = 49.2, p < .05],
with a fair model fit [Nagelkerke R2 = .14]. Overall
classification was somewhat weaker than for the Native
English group but prediction of first syllable stress was
stronger. On the basis of the three predictor variables,
correct classification rates were 82% for initial and 46%
for final stress, with an overall success rate of 67%.
Table 6 shows the contribution of the individual
predictors to the model for each group by giving the
Wald statistic (in terms of z-ratio) and the odds ratio,
which estimate the strength of the prediction. As another
estimate of the relative strength of the contribution of each
of the predictor variables, each variable was removed from
the model in turn and the difference in -2 Log Likelihood
(-2LL) between the two- vs. three-variable model was
determined.
The effect of Lexical Class made a unique, significant
contribution to the model for all three groups. It was
the strongest predictor for the Native English and Early
Bilingual groups, and roughly equivalent to Phonological
Similarity for the Late Bilingual group. Likewise,
the effect of Phonological Similarity made a unique,
significant contribution to the model for all three groups. It
was the second strongest predictor for the Native English
and Early Bilingual groups, and roughly equivalent to
Lexical Class for the Late Bilingual group. The effect of
Syllabic Structure, on the other hand, was only significant
for the Native English and Early Bilingual groups, being
the weakest predictor. The factor Syllabic Structure did
not make a significant contribution to the model for the
Late Bilingual group.
Perception data
A logistic regression analysis was performed on
preference of stress placement on the non-words in
Experiment 2 as outcome and three predictor variables:
Syllabic Structure, Lexical Class and Phonological
Similarity.
For the Native English group, after deletion of 284
cases with missing values on Phonological Similarity, 516
cases were available for analysis. A test of the full model
with all three predictors against a constant-only model was
statistically reliable, [ 2 (3) = 64.0, p < .05], indicating
that the predictors, as a set, reliably distinguished between
initial and final stress on the perception data with a fair
model fit [Nagelkerke R2 = .16]. Overall classification
was fair. On the basis of the three predictor variables,
correct classification rates were 50% for initial and 80%
for final stress, with an overall success rate of 69%.
For the Early Spanish-English Bilingual group,
after deletion of 312 cases with missing values on
Phonological Similarity, 488 cases were available for
analysis. A test of the full model was statistically reliable,

Stress patterns in bilinguals

221

Table 6. Results from logistic regression analyses with the production results from Experiment 1
as the dependent variable.
Odds
Ratio

Diff. in -2LL
if removed

Predictor variables

B (S.E.)

Wald (z-ratio)
(df = 1)

Native English group
Lexical Class
Phonological Similarity
Syllabic Structure
Constant

1.3 (.20)
1.2 (.19)
0.9 (.23)
-4.8 (.63)

41.4 (p < .05)
34.3 (p < .05)
14.1 (p < .05)
58.2 (p < .05)

3.6
3.2
2.4
0.008

44.2 (p < .05)
35.9 (p < .05)
14.4 (p < .05)

Early Spanish-English Bilingual group
Lexical Class
Phonological Similarity
Syllabic Structure
Constant

1.4 (.22)
1.1 (.21)
1.0 (.25)
-4.8 (.70)

39.8 (p < .05)
24.7 (p < .05)
16.4 (p < .05)
46.4 (p < .05)

3.9
2.9
2.8
0.008

43.3 (p < .05)
25.7 (p < .05)
16.7 (p < .05)

Late Spanish-English Bilingual group
Phonological Similarity
Lexical Class
Syllabic Structure
Constant

1.0 (.21)
0.9 (.21)
0.5 (.21)
-1.1 (.21)

22.1 (p < .05)
20.4 (p < .05)
3.5 (p>.05)
38.3 (p < .05)

2.7
2.6
1.6
0.3

23.1 (p < .05)
21.1 (p < .05)
3.5 (p>.05)

Note: B is the logistic coefficient or `logit' representing the log of the odds for an event occurring for a case when
the value of an independent variable increases by 1. The Wald statistic (z-ratio) determines the significance
of the effect. The odds ratio (Exp(B)) represents the odds of an event occurring for a case when the value of
an independent variable increases by 1. The lower 95% confidence interval for the odds ratio was above 1 for
all significant effects reported. The final column presents the change in -2 Log Likelihood (an estimation of
the goodness of fit for the model) if the variable in that row is removed. The significance of the removal is
determined by a  2 test with 1 degree of freedom.

[ 2 (3) = 22.9, p < .05]. However, the fit of the model was
poor [Nagelkerke R2 = .06]. Overall classification was
unimpressive. On the basis of the three predictor variables,
correct classification rates were 42% for initial and 74%
for final stress, with an overall success rate of 60%.
For the Late Spanish-English Bilingual group, after
deletion of 330 cases with missing values on Phonological
Similarity, 470 cases were available for analysis. A test
of the full model was statistically reliable, [ 2 (3) = 26.7,
p < .05]. However, the fit of the model was poor
[Nagelkerke R2 = .08]. Overall classification was
unimpressive but, as in the production data, prediction
of first syllable stress was better for the late bilingual
group. On the basis of the three predictor variables, correct
classification rates were 77% for initial and 38% for final
stress, with an overall success rate of 60%.
Table 7 shows the contribution of the individual
predictors to the model for each group by giving the Wald
statistic, odds ratio and change in -2LL when the factor
was removed from the model. Phonological Similarity
made the greatest contribution to the model for all three
groups. Lexical Class and Syllabic Structure made lesser,
but roughly equal contributions to the model for the
Native English and Early Bilingual Groups. For the Late

Bilingual group, on the other hand, Lexical class reached
significance but the effect of Syllabic Structure was not
significantly associated with the outcome.5
5

As a significant portion of the data were removed from the threefactor analyses due to missing Phonological Similarity data points,
separate regression analyses with just the two factors of Lexical
Class and Syllabic Structure were performed to determine the effects
of these factors with the entire data set. The same effects were
found to be significant, with similar relative strengths, in the twofactor analyses. For the regressions performed on the PRODUCTION
data, in the case of the Native English and Early Bilingual groups,
Lexical Class made the strongest prediction [z = 56.3, p < .05,
odds ratio = 3.2; z = 62.9, p < .05, odds ratio = 3.9, respectively],
followed by Syllabic Structure [z = 35.9, p < .05, odds ratio = 2.9;
z = 36.6, p < .05, odds ratio = 2.9]. For the Late Bilingual group,
Lexical Class made a significant contribution to the model [z = 21.4,
p < .05, odds ratio = 2.1], but Syllabic Structure did not [z = 3.7,
p > .05, odds ratio = 1.4]. For the regressions performed on the
PERCEPTION data, in the case of the Native English and Early Bilingual
groups, Syllabic Structure [z = 28.5, p < .05, odds ratio = 2.4;
z = 11.7, p < .05, odds ratio = 1.8, respectively] made a slightly
greater contribution to the model than Lexical Class [z = 12.6,
p < .05, odds ratio = 1.7; z = 10.3, p < .05, odds ratio = 1.6]. For the
Late Bilingual group, Lexical Class made a significant contribution
to the model [z = 20.1, p < .05, odds ratio = 1.9]; Syllabic Structure
[z = 1.6, p > .05, odds ratio = 1.2] did not. These results indicate

222

S. G. Guion, T. Harada and J. J. Clark
Table 7. Results from logistic regression analyses with the perception results from Experiment 2
as the dependent variable.
Odds
Ratio

Diff. in -2LL
if removed

Predictor variables

B (S.E.)

Wald (z-ratio)
(df = 1)

Native English group
Phonological Similarity
Syllabic Structure
Lexical Class
Constant

1.1 (.19)
0.8 (.27)
0.8 (.20)
-3.6 (.59)

31.4 (p < .05)
12.0 (p < .05)
14.8 (p < .05)
37.9 (p < .05)

2.9
2.2
2.1
0.03

32.6 (p < .05)
12.1 (p < .05)
15.1 (p < .05)

Early Spanish-English Bilingual group
Phonological Similarity
Lexical Class
Syllabic Structure
Constant

0.7 (.18)
0.4 (.18)
0.5 (.23)
-2.3 (.60)

14.1 (p < .05)
4.6 (p < .05)
4.5 (p < .05)
14.9 (p < .05)

2.0
1.5
1.6
0.1

14.3 (p < .05)
4.6 (p < .05)
4.5 (p < .05)

Late Spanish-English Bilingual group
Phonological Similarity
Lexical Class
Syllabic Structure
Constant

0.9 (.20)
0.3 (.20)
-0.2 (.23)
-2.2 (.59)

17.8 (p < .05)
8.0 (p < .05)
0.6 (p>.05)
13.6 (p < .05)

2.4
1.7
0.8
0.1

18.5 (p < .05)
8.1 (p < .05)
0.6 (p > .05)

Discussion
The results indicate that all three predictor variables,
Lexical Class, Phonological Similarity and Syllabic
Structure, made significant and partially independent
predictions of stress placement for both the native English
speakers and the early Spanish-English bilinguals.
However, only the predictor variables of Lexical Class and
Phonological Similarity made significant predictions of
stress placement for the late Spanish-English bilinguals.
This indicates that the late bilinguals were not reliably
using knowledge of the relationship between syllabic
structure and stress placement for the production and
perception of stress in non-words. This finding correlates
with the results from the ANOVAs, which found that
the late bilinguals had weaker and somewhat different
effects of Syllabic Structure than the native English
speakers.
The finding that Syllabic Structure did not contribute
significantly to the regression model for the late bilingual
group but did for the early bilingual group is readily
congruent with the findings from the ANOVA for the
production experiment. In this case the early group was
native-like, whereas the late group showed only one
of three syllabic structure effects found for the native
speakers. Evidently, this single effect was too weak to
contribute significantly to the regression model. In the

that the effects for the factors Lexical Class and Syllabic Structure
reported in the three-factor analyses are representative of the entire
data set.

case of the perception data, the finding that Syllabic
Structure did not contribute significantly to the regression
model for the late bilingual group but did for the early
bilingual group requires a closer look at the patterns of
stress assignment by Syllabic Structure. As can be clearly
seen in Figure 2, the early bilingual group showed the same
trends for Syllabic Structure effects as the native English
speakers. The only difference was that the final long vowel
effect (CVCVVC having more final stress than CVCVC)
did not reach significance, although the trend was clearly
present. The late bilinguals, on the other hand, do not show
the same general trends as the native English speakers (see
Figure 2). The final long vowel effect was found but the
initial long vowel effect (CVVCVC having more initial
stress than CVCVC) was not present, even as a general
trend. Thus, even though both early and late bilinguals
differed from the native English speakers in the perception
experiment with regard to the Syllabic Structure effect,
the late bilinguals were more different and did not show
trends in the direction of the significant effects found in
the native speakers like the early bilinguals did. These
differences were reflected in the regression analysis in
which the effect of Syllabic Structure did not make a
significant contribution for the late bilinguals.
For the native English and early Spanish-English
bilingual participants, Lexical Class made the strongest
predictions for the production data, indicating that these
participants were relying most heavily on this factor
when producing stress on the non-words. However, the
effect was weaker for the late bilinguals (contributing
approximately the same amount to the model as

Stress patterns in bilinguals
Phonological Similarity), echoing the results from the
ANOVA, which found a reduced effect of Lexical Class
for late bilinguals in the production data.
For the perception data, Phonological Similarity made
the strongest predictions for all three groups, indicating
that participants were relying most heavily on stress
patterns of phonologically similar words in determining
their preference for stress placement. The greater
relative strength of analogical assignment of stress from
phonologically similar real words in the perception than
production data may indicate that phonological associations are more likely to be activated in a receptive task.
General discussion and conclusion
The results indicate that syllabic structure, lexical class
and stress placement of phonologically similar words all
had independent effects on stress placement in non-words
for the native speakers of English tested here. The effect
of the syllabic structure of the stimulus non-words on
stress placement indicated that long vowels attracted
more stress than short vowels and that coda consonant
clusters sometimes attracted more stress than singleton
codas. Second, the distributional patterning of stress by
lexical class affected stress assignment. Nouns were more
likely to be assigned initial syllable stress than verbs
for all non-word types investigated here, mirroring the
distributional characteristics of these two lexical classes.
Third, the location of stress on phonologically similar real
words also influenced the placement of stress. The stress
patterns of phonologically similar words predicted stress
independently of the other two factors. This was found
to be the case in regression analyses on both the production and perception data. These results largely replicate
an earlier study using the same experimental protocol
with different native English participants (Guion et al.,
2003). Thus, these findings seem to be stable and potentially indicative of stress processing in English speakers.
The early Spanish-English bilinguals tested here
showed patterns of stress placement that were similar to
the native English speakers. However, there were some
differences in the effect of syllabic structure on the
perception data (i.e. no final long vowel effect). This
indicates that, given early and prolonged exposure to
English, learners may be able to acquire knowledge of
stress patterns quite similar, but not identical, to that of
native speakers.
The late Spanish-English bilinguals, on the other
hand, had more differences from the native English
speakers than the early Spanish-English bilinguals did.
First, in Experiment 1 (production) and Experiment 2
(perception), the syllabic structure of the four nonword types showed fewer and simpler effects on stress
placement than was the case for the native English and
early bilingual participants.

223

Second, the effect of lexical class on stress placement
was different from the native English and early bilingual
groups. In the production experiment, the effect was
weaker, but in the perception experiment, the effect was
stronger than the other groups. These results may indicate
that the late bilinguals have learned the patterns of stress
assignment based on lexical class, but that this knowledge
cannot be as effectively used in a production task. Perhaps
knowledge of lexical stress patterns was more abundantly
displayed in the perception experiment due to reduced
demands on the processing system, as word formation
and production were not involved.
Third, in the regression analyses for both the production and the perception data, the stress predicted by
syllabic structure did not independently contribute to the
prediction of stress placement. However, the stress predicted by lexical class and, most strongly, stress patterns
of phonologically similar words did. This implies that late
bilinguals do not reliably use knowledge of stress patterns
based on syllabic structure in stress assignment.
Fourth, the late Spanish-English bilinguals produced
and preferred more initial syllable stress than the other
two groups did. These results may be due to the transfer of
knowledge of a distributional pattern in which penultimate
stress is the most common in the Spanish lexicon.
Alternatively, the greater initial syllable stress for the
late bilinguals may be due to the learning and then
overgeneralization of another distributional property of
English stress. Namely, over 70% of content words in
English begin with a stressed syllable (Cutler and Carter,
1987). Perhaps the late bilinguals have learned this
statistical tendency and are applying it in the tasks in this
study. However, if this is the case, it would remain to be
explained why the native English speakers and the early
bilinguals were not similarly influenced by knowledge of
this distribution.
The results of this study indicate that both early and late
bilinguals are able to learn and employ relatively simple
distributional patterns such as the statistical distribution
of stress across nouns and verbs. It seems that both
groups of bilinguals were able to detect the probability
of stress placement on these two lexical classes, encode
that knowledge and use it probabilistically when assigning
stress to non-words. Knowledge of stress patterns by
lexical class was most strongly evidenced in the perception
experiment for the late bilinguals. The knowledge of stress
differences across the lexical classes could not have been
transferred from Spanish, as no such lexical differences
exist (Harris, 1992). Thus, the findings of Davis and Kelly
(1997) were supported in the current work. It seems
that both early and late bilinguals are able to extract
distributional patterns of stress based on lexical class from
second-language input.
A second major finding of the study is that complex
distributional patterns of stress placement related to

224

S. G. Guion, T. Harada and J. J. Clark

prosodic structure (i.e. syllabic structure) appear more
difficult to learn. Even the early bilingual speakers were
not completely native-like in their knowledge of stress
patterns based on syllabic structure. In the perception
experiment, the early bilinguals evidenced a slightly
reduced knowledge of syllabic structure effects compared
to the native English speakers. The late bilinguals showed
even fewer effects of syllabic structure on stress placement
in both the production and perception experiments than
the early bilinguals. In addition, the effect of this factor
was so weak that it was not a significant predictor in the
regression analyses for the late bilinguals. However, it
must be noted that the late bilinguals did show evidence
of learning some aspects of prosodic patterning. In other
words, while the late bilinguals showed fewer and reduced
effects of syllabic structure on stress placement, some of
the patterns found for the native speakers were present in
their stress assignment.
These results are in agreement with earlier studies
on the acquisition of stress (see review in introduction)
which have generally found that second language learners
of English do not have native-like knowledge of stress
patterns based on syllabic structure.
A third interpretation from the data in this study
suggests that native speakers, as well as both early and
late bilinguals, use analogy with phonologically similar
real words to determine stress placement. This ability
seems to be equally available to all learners. However,
late learners appear to rely relatively more heavily on
analogical extension than the other groups.
Given the fact that both groups of bilinguals were
highly accurate (over 95% correct) with stress placement
on real English words, as evidenced by the stress
placement test, it seems that both early and late learners
are able to learn stress placement, but that the knowledge
underlying the stress placement is different for bilinguals
and monolinguals. In the case of the early bilinguals,
knowledge of stress placement by syllabic structure is
slightly different and, in the case of late bilinguals, it is
pronouncedly different. Perhaps the late bilinguals rely
more heavily on word-by-word learning or on analogical
extension of stress patterns and less on abstracted patterns
of stress placement.
Overall, the results of the study run counter to the
conclusions of Long (1990) that learners older than 12
would not be able to acquire phonological knowledge in a
second language and learners younger than seven would
be native-like in this knowledge. The late bilinguals in this
study demonstrated knowledge of some aspects of stress
placement, namely distributions based on lexical class, a
small portion of distributions based on syllabic structure,
and the ability to use analogy in stress placement. On
the other hand, the early learners were not completely
native-like either. They showed small deviations from the

English speakers in their knowledge of stress placement
by syllabic structure.
Although differences between early and late bilinguals
were found in this study, we must be cautious and not
attribute these differences to age of acquisition effects
alone. The early bilinguals had a longer length of residence
in the US than the late bilinguals (mean 23 vs. 13 years).
In some studies, length of residence has been found
to correlate with foreign accent ratings (e.g. Asher and
Garcia, 1969; Purcell and Suter, 1980; Flege et al., 1995a).
Additionally, the early and late bilinguals differed in
number of years of education in an English-speaking
medium (most schooling vs. college only). Flege et al.
(1999) showed that some aspects of morphosyntactic
knowledge were affected by years of schooling in the
US. However, the fact that the early and late bilinguals in
the current study were matched for proficiency in several
linguistic areas (grammar, lexicon and stress placement)
and had comparable overall English usage (85% vs. 75%)
may indicate that the effects of length of residence and
amount of education in the US on ultimate attainment of
a second language were not pronounced in the sample of
bilinguals reported here.
Cautiously accepting the interpretation that the effects
found were at least partly due to age of acquisition, the
results indicate that some language acquisition processes
associated with word stress may be available across
the lifespan, whereas others may not. Specifically, early
and late bilinguals both demonstrated the ability for
analogical extension of stress patterns from known words.
Likewise, early and late bilinguals were both relatively
successful with language acquisition processes requiring
the learning of a relatively simple pattern, the distribution
of stress across lexical classes of noun and verb (the
effect was seen most robustly in the perception experiment
for the late bilinguals). On the other hand, language
acquisition processes requiring more complex pattern
learning, such as those associated with the distribution
of stress by syllabic structure, were adversely affected in
late bilinguals. Even the early bilinguals showed slight
deficits in this regard.
The difference between analogical extension and
simple lexical patterning on the one hand, and complex
syllabic patterning on the other, may merely be one of
complexity of the distributional pattern to be learned or it
may be a qualitative difference in the nature of the learning
required. Future research will be needed to decide between
these two possibilities.
References
Alvarez, C. J., Carreiras, M. & de Vega, M. (1992). Estudio
estadistico de la ortografia castellana: (1) La frecuencia
silabica. Cognitiva, 4, 75-105.

Stress patterns in bilinguals
Archibald, J. (1992). Transfer of L1 parameter settings: Some
empirical evidence from Polish metrics. Canadian Journal
of Linguistics, 37, 301-339.
Archibald, J. (1993). The learnability of English metrical
parameters by adult Spanish speakers. International Review
of Applied Linguistics and Language Teaching, 31/32, 129-
142.
Archibald, J. (1997). The acquisition of English stress by
speakers of nonaccentual languages: Lexical storage versus
computation of stress. Linguistics, 35, 167-181.
Asher, J. J. & Garcia, R. (1969). The optimal age to learn a second
language. The Modern Language Journal, 53, 334-341.
Baayen, R. H., Piepenbrock, R. & Gulikers, L. (1995). The
CELEX lexical database. Philadelphia: Linguistic Data
Consortium, University of Pennsylvania.
Baker, R. G. & Smith, P. T. (1976). A psycholinguistic study of
English stress assignment rules. Language and Speech, 19,
9-27.
Chomsky, N. & Halle, M. (1968). The sound pattern of English
(Paperback reprint 1991). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Cutler, A. & Carter, D. M. (1987). The predominance of
strong initial syllables in the English vocabulary. Computer
Speech and Language, 2, 133-142.
Daelemans, W., Gillis, S. & Durieux, G. (1994). The acquisition
of stress: A data-oriented approach. Computational
Linguistics 20, 421-451.
Davis, S. M. & Kelly, M. H. (1997). Knowledge of the
English noun-verb stress difference by native and nonnative
speakers. Journal of Memory and Language, 36, 445-460.
Erdmann, P. H. (1973). Patterns of stress-transfer in English and
German. International Review of Applied Linguistics, 11,
299-241.
Faitelson-Weiser, S. (1987). Dictionnaire inverse et analyse
statistique de la langue Espagnole. Quebec: University of
Laval Press.
Flege, J. E. (1988). Factors affecting degree of perceived foreign
accent in English sentences. Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 84, 70-79.
Flege, J. E. (1991). Age of learning affects the authenticity of
voice-onset time (VOT) in stop consonants produced in
a second language. Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America, 89, 395-411.
Flege, J. E. (1993). Production and perception of a novel, secondlanguage phonetic contrast. Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 93, 1589-1608.
Flege, J. E., MacKay, I. R. A. & Meador, D. (1999). Native Italian
speakers' perception and production of English vowels.
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 106, 2973-
2987.
Flege, J. E., Munro, M. J. & MacKay, I. R. A. (1995a). Factors
affecting strength of perceived foreign accent in a second
language. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 97,
3125-3134.
Flege, J. E., Munro, M. J. & MacKay, I. R. A. (1995b). Effects
of age of second-language learning on the production of
English consonants. Speech Communication, 16, 1-26.
Flege, J. E., Yeni-Komshian, G. H. & Liu, S. (1999). Age
constraints on second-language acquisition. Journal of
Memory & Language, 41, 78-104.

225

Francis, W. N. & Kucera, H. (1982). Frequency analysis
of English usage: Lexicon and grammar. Boston, MA:
Houghton Mifflin.
Gillis, S., Daelemans, W. & Durieux, G. (2000). `Lazy
Learning': A comparison of natural and machine learning
of stress. In P. Broeder & J. Murre (eds.), Models
of language acquisition, pp. 76-99. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Guion, S. G. (2003). The vowel systems of Quichua-Spanish
bilinguals: Age of acquisition effects on the mutual
influence of the first and second languages. Phonetica, 60,
98-128.
Guion, S. G., Clark, J. J., Harada, T. & Wayland, R. P. (2003).
Factors affecting stress placement for English non-words
include syllabic structure, lexical class, and stress patterns
of phonologically similar words. Language and Speech, 46,
403-427.
Guion, S. G., Flege, J. E. & Loftin, J. D. (2000). The effect of
L1 use on pronunciation of Quichua-Spanish bilinguals.
Journal of Phonetics, 28, 27-42.
Hammill, D. D., Brown, V. L., Larsen, S. C. & Weiderholt, J. L.
(1994). Test of adolescent and adult language (3rd edn.).
Austin, TX: Pro-ed.
Harris, J. W. (1969). Spanish phonology. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Harris, J. W. (1992). Spanish stress: The extrametricality issue.
Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Linguistics Club.
Hayes, B. (1982). Extrametricality and English stress. Linguistic
Inquiry, 13, 227-276.
Kelly, M. H. & Bock, J. K. (1988). Stress in time. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 14, 389-403.
Long, M. H. (1990). Maturational constraints on the language
development. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 12,
251-285.
Mairs, J. L. (1989). Stress assignment in interlanguage
phonology: An analysis of the stress system of
Spanish speakers learning English. In S. M. Gass &
J. Schachter (eds.), Linguistic perspectives on second
language acquisition, pp. 260-283. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
MacGraw, K. O. & Wong, S. P. (1996). Forming inferences about
some intraclass correlation coefficients. Psychological
Methods, 1, 30-46.
Munro, M. J., Flege, J. E. & MacKay, I. R. A. (1996). The
effects of age of second language learning on the production
of English vowels. Applied Psycholinguists, 17, 313-
334.
Neville, H. (1999). Specificity and plasticity in neurocognitive
development in humans. In M. Gazzaniga (ed.), The new
cognitive neurosciences (2nd edn.), pp. 83-98. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Pater, J. V. (1997). Metrical parameter missetting in second
language acquisition. In S. J. Hannahs & M. YoungScholten (eds.), Focus on phonological acquisition,
pp. 235-261. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Piske, T., MacKay, I. R. A. & Flege, J. E. (2001). Factors affecting
degree of foreign accent in an L2: A review. Journal of
Phonetics, 29, 191-215.

226

S. G. Guion, T. Harada and J. J. Clark

Purcell, E. T. & Suter, R. W. (1980). Predictors of pronunciation
accuracy: A reexamination. Language Learning, 30, 271-
287.
Sereno, J. A. (1986). Stress pattern differentiation of form class
in English. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
79, S36.
Smith, S. (1997). SPARCS (Stimulus Presentation and Response
Collection System for Windows). University of Alabama
at Birmingham, Department of Rehabilitation Sciences.
Weber-Fox, C. & Neville, H. (1999). Functional neural subsystems are differentially affected by delays in second
language immersion: ERP and behavioral evidence in
bilinguals. In D. Birdsong (ed.), Second language acqui-

sition and the critical period hypothesis, pp. 23-38.
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Woods, A., Fletcher, P. & Hughes, A. (1986). Statistics
in language studies. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Yeni-Komshian, G. H., Flege, J. E. & Liu, S. (2000). Pronunciation proficiency in the first and second languages
of Korean-English bilinguals. Bilingualism: Language and
Cognition, 3, 131-149.
Received April 11, 2003
Revisions received September 9, 2003; February 6, 2004
Accepted March 9, 2004

Appendix. Words read by the Spanish-English bilinguals in the frame sentence "I said
accuracy in stress placement on real English words.
Consistent with stress rules

this time" to determine

Inconsistent with stress rules

Lexical Class

Syllabic structure with stress
predicted by rulea

Word

Frequencyb

Word

Frequencyb

Noun
Noun
Noun
Noun
Verb
Verb
Noun
Noun
Verb
Verb
Noun
Noun
Noun
Noun
Noun
Noun
Verb
Verb

" CVCC
" CVCC
 "CVV(C)
 "CVV(C)
 "CVV(C)
 "CVV(C)
" CVC
" CVC
" CVC
" CVC
 "CVV (C)V(C)
 "CVC CV(C)
" CV CV(C)
" CV CV(C)
"  CVV(C)
"  CVV(C)
"  CVV(C)
"  CVV(C)

agent
aspect
machine
prestige
behave
maintain
basket
habit
cancel
manage
potato
agenda
origin
numeral
hurricane
magazine
indicate
compensate

4354
4352
8934
994
1749
5436
1351
2274
892
4092
878
2352
2913
37
510
4690
4140
872

percent
descent
pillow
window
borrow
rotate
hotel
giraffe
begin
possess
medium
calendar
eleven
banana
spaghetti
kangaroo
introduce
entertain

2928
1069
720
10588
1451
236
11447
71
7497
1545
3443
1117
3788
538
281
115
3491
651

Mean frequency

2823.33

2832.00

 = A syllable of any type.
a
= Rules of English stress as outlined in Chomsky and Halle (1968).
b
= Word frequency determined by the British National Corpus online at http://www.hcu.ox.ac.uk/BNC/. Since all words listed are
common and relatively frequent in British and American English, large frequency differences using an American English corpus
would not be expected.

