Journal of Memory and Language 60 (2009) 229-251

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Memory and Language
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jml

An associative-activation theory of children's and adults' memory illusions
Mark L. Howe a,*, Marina C. Wimmer a, Nadine Gagnon b, Shannon Plumpton c
a
b
c

Department of Psychology, Lancaster University, Center for Research in Human Development, Lancaster LA1 4YF, United Kingdom
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada
Simon Fraser University, Vancouver, BC, Canada

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 8 April 2008
Revision received 14 October 2008
Available online 25 November 2008
Keywords:
DRM paradigm
False memories
Associative-activation theory
Memory development
Children's false memory
Semantic density
Fuzzy-trace theory

a b s t r a c t
The effects of associative strength and gist relations on rates of children's and adults' true
and false memories were examined in three experiments. Children aged 5-11 and university-aged adults participated in a standard Deese/Roediger-McDermott false memory task
using DRM and category lists in two experiments and in the third, children memorized lists
that differed in associative strength and semantic cohesion. In the first two experiments,
half of the participants were primed before list presentation with gist-relevant cues and
the results showed that: (1) both true and false memories increased with age, (2) true
recall was higher than false recall for all ages, (3) at all ages, false memory rates were determined by backward associative strength, and (4) false memories varied predictably with
changes in associative strength but were unaffected by gist manipulations (category structure or gist priming). In the third experiment, both gist and associative strength were varied orthogonally and the results showed that regardless of age, children's (5) true recall
was affected by gist manipulations (semantic cohesion) and (6) false recall was affected
by backward associative strength. These findings are discussed in the context of models
of false memory illusions and continuities in memory development more generally.
O 2008 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Introduction
Recent research has shown that children are less susceptible to false memories than adults especially when
those false memories are generated spontaneously as in
the Deese/Roediger-McDermott (DRM; Deese, 1959;
Roediger & McDermott, 1995) paradigm (Brainerd, Reyna,
& Forrest, 2002; Howe, 2005, 2006, 2008a; Howe, Cichetti,
Toth, & Cerrito, 2004; Howe, Gagnon, & Thouas, 2008).
Briefly, the DRM task consists of presenting lists of words
that are related to an unpresented concept (e.g., hot, snow,
warm, winter, ice, wet, frigid, chilly, heat, weather, freeze, and
air are related to the unpresented item COLD). The unpresented item, also termed the critical lure, is often reported
along with presented list items during subsequent recall or
recognition tasks.

* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: mark.howe@lancaster.ac.uk (M.L. Howe).
0749-596X/$ - see front matter O 2008 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jml.2008.10.002

Although the false-memory illusion arising from the
DRM paradigm is a robust phenomenon, it is not clear
what mechanisms underlie children's false memories and
why false memories increase across childhood. From the
adult literature it is generally suggested that the items on
the DRM list directly activate related but unpresented concepts during study and this happens automatically outside
of conscious awareness. When it is time to recall or recognize the list items, the unpresented but activated concept
is also falsely output because participants cannot discriminate them from the original list members.
Theoretical explanations of this effect, such as fuzzytrace theory (FTT), have attempted to account for these
findings by suggesting that there are two memory traces
encoded during list presentation--verbatim and gist (Brainerd & Reyna, 2005). These traces are qualitatively different from each other: verbatim traces are concerned with
item-specific surface information (e.g., the number of phonemes in a word) and gist traces with meaning-based
information (i.e., the theme of a word list). It is this gist

230

M.L. Howe et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 60 (2009) 229-251

trace that is thought to be responsible for false recall in the
DRM paradigm particularly when verbatim traces (which
fade more rapidly) are not available. Gist traces are particularly relevant in recall rather than recognition because
the physical presence of the item in the recognition test
is more likely to activate its verbatim trace. Although gist
is not clearly defined in FTT (e.g., Howe, 2008b), in general
it concerns the abstraction of a common ``theme" contained within the presented material (e.g., see Brainerd,
Reyna, & Ceci, 2008). Thus, for example, in the DRM paradigm, the gist is the theme of the list. When categorized or
taxonomic items are used, the category itself serves as the
gist. Not only do word lists contain gist, but so too do single
words--that is, individual words can have their own unique meaning or local gist that can cause false memories
(e.g., Reyna & Lloyd, 1997). It is the extraction of this gist
that underlies false memory production, particularly when
verbatim traces have faded. Developmentally, although
young children are capable of extracting the gist, the ability to do so improves with age, especially their ability to
extract thematic meaning across list items (Brainerd &
Reyna, 2005). As this ability increases with age, so does
the child's susceptibility to the DRM illusion.
An alternative explanation, associative-activation theory (AAT), states that children's false memories are a product of associative-activation processes (Howe, 2005, 2006,
2008b). Associative relations between list items and the
critical lure are important contributors to the false memory illusion (Deese, 1959; McEvoy, Nelson, & Komatsu,
1999; Roediger, Watson, McDermott, & Gallo, 2001b;
Underwood, 1965). This theory (as well as activationmonitoring theory, AMT, Roediger, Balota, & Watson,
2001a) derives from spreading activation models that suggest that the processing of one word activates a corresponding node (i.e., concept) in our mental lexicon (or
more generally, our knowledge base) and this activation
spreads to surrounding concept nodes (Collins & Loftus,
1975; Landauer & Dumais, 1997). In particular, one word
(or concept) activates another and some of these activated
concepts are items that have not been presented but have
been ``incorrectly" activated due to their connection with
presented items in the knowledge base. Howe (2005,
2006, 2008b; Howe et al., 2008) suggests that increases
in children's false memory with age may be due to changes
in children's knowledge base (e.g., accretion of associations, reorganization of knowledge). This, combined with
additional experience and practice utilizing concepts results in increases in the automaticity with which children
access or activate associations in their knowledge base,
including associations that mediate false remembering.
According to the AAT (Howe, 2005, 2006, 2008b; Howe
et al., 2008), children's false memories, like those of adults,
should increase as a function of increasing associative
strength between list items and the critical lure. However,
it is unlikely that young children's rates of false memories
will be similar to those of older children and adults because concepts and the associative relations among them
are not activated as automatically as they are for adults.
As demonstrated by studies of memory organization, the
quantity and quality of associative relations between old
and newly acquired concepts continue to undergo signifi-

cant changes with development (Bjorklund, 1987, 2004).
As children gain knowledge and experience through exposure and development, their conceptual representations
and the associative links among related concepts become
better integrated in memory (Bjorklund,1987, 2004; Howe,
2000). Although these changes in the organization of conceptual representations strengthen the links between related concepts, children's ability to automatically process
these relations and activate related concepts will depend
on their developing cognitive abilities.
The production of false memories in the DRM paradigm
is relatively automatic for adults, for whom associated but
unpresented items, such as the critical lure, are primed
through their associative links with the presented list
items. Children's ability to process and activate these items
through their associative links with list items is not as
automatic (for a review, see Howe, 2000). The activation
of these associative links is effortful for young children,
but as children get older, less cognitive effort is required
to process and activate associative links between related
concepts, which in turn increases their susceptibility to
the DRM false memory illusion (Howe, 2005; Metzger
et al., 2008). For example, Howe (2005) found that young
children are able to inhibit false memories suggesting that
they are less automatic per se. In this study children were
presented with two DRM lists. After the first list had been
presented children either received remember instructions
(``keep remembering the words on this list") or forget
instructions (``this was just a practice list, you can forget
it") and then told to remember the second list. A third control group received no instructions and served as a baseline
for true and false memory rates. The results showed that
children in the forgetting condition had significantly fewer
false memories than children in the control condition
whereas children in the remember condition had significantly more false memories than children in the control
condition. If false memories occurred automatically at the
time of encoding or retrieval, as they do in adults (see Kimball & Bjork, 2002), inhibition would have been extremely
difficult. The fact that children were able to inhibit false
memories suggests that they are less automatic than for
adults. Therefore, consistent with the predictions of AAT,
it is likely that as the automaticity of associative-activation
increases with age so too does children's susceptibility to
false memory illusions.
FTT contains no assumptions about the role of consciousness and automaticity in the development of the
false memory illusion (Brainerd, Forrest, Karibian, & Reyna,
2006; Brainerd & Reyna, 2005). However, FTT differs from
AAT on other important dimensions, ones in which distinct
predictions can be derived and tested. One critical difference between AAT and FTT is that according to AAT, activation spreads from one word or concept representation to
another whereas according to FTT it spreads from a word
or list of words to an extracted gist (e.g., thematic representation) to additional representations consistent with
the extracted gist. In other words, in AAT concepts directly
activate each other in the knowledge base whereas in FTT
there is an additional, mediated step involving a separate
thematic representation that must be extracted prior to
the activation of additional, nonpresented words or con-

M.L. Howe et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 60 (2009) 229-251

cepts. Unlike FTT, AAT does not require the separate activation of a theme or gist trace in order for false memories to
occur.
What does the empirical research say about these two
theories? Because gist effects are said to be more likely
using recall than recognition measures (e.g., Brainerd
et al., 2008), we focus primarily on studies that report recall data. First, consider studies on gist-cuing manipulations. Here, experiments have shown that when gist is
manipulated in children's recall, false memory rates can
be elevated, a finding that on the surface supports FTT
(e.g., Brainerd et al., 2006; Holliday, Reyna, & Brainerd,
2008; Odegard, Holliday, Brainerd, & Reyna, 2008). For
example, 11-year-olds were more likely to produce false
memories when they received additional cue words at
study that biased the context toward, rather than away,
from the gist of a list (Odegard et al., 2008). However, the
interpretation of this outcome is problematic for a number
of reasons. For example, because there was no control
group that did not receive any gist manipulation, it is difficult to say whether the toward-condition elevated false
memories, the away-condition lowered false memories,
or both. Moreover, the manipulation itself may not have
been purely gist-based inasmuch as the words used as
additional cues to meaning may simply have served to increase the associative-activation of the unpresented critical lure.
In another study, false memory rates increased when
children were told beforehand that they would be presented with words that have similar meanings. This effect
was larger for younger (6- and 11-year-olds) than for older
(14-year-olds) children (Brainerd et al., 2006). This is what
FTT would anticipate because younger children have more
problems extracting gist than older children and, therefore,
gist instructions should have a more pronounced effect at a
younger age. It is not clear, however, how instructing children to look for something they cannot easily extract (i.e.,
gist) should increase their ability to do so. Alternatively,
reminding children to look for meaningful relations in
studied material is but one metamemory instruction that
may affect children's ability to search for interitem associative connections, connections they already possess but
may fail to activate automatically (e.g., see Schneider &
Pressley, 1997).
Other studies have found that gist-like manipulations
affect children's false memory rates, although these effects
do not interact with age. For example, Holliday et al. (2008)
found that, contrary to their expectation, false recall rates
increased similarly for 7- to 13-year-olds when specific
thematic labels were given before list presentation (e.g.,
``the words you will hear are all related in meaning, they
are all medical words"). Howe (2006) found that presenting a label (e.g., animals) prior to categorized (taxonomic)
lists did not increase false recall for 5- to 11-year-olds.
Overall, then, the empirical evidence from gist-cuing studies reporting recall data is inconsistent and difficult to
interpret due to methodological differences (e.g., the use
of DRM versus category lists) across studies.
Second, the AAT interpretation is favored by dissociations of true and false recall. Hutchison and Balota (2005)
with adults and Howe (2006) with children found that

231

within-list thematic relations affected true but not false
memories and that associative relations influenced both,
but had a greater effect on false memories. Park, Shobe,
and Kihlstrom (2005) also demonstrated that categorical
relations elicited fewer false memories than associative
relations in studies of adults' true and false recall. Moreover, children's true recall increases when categorical lists
are presented in contrast to DRM lists, but there are no differences for false recall (Howe, 2006). Thus, contrary to
predictions from gist-based theories, neither adults' nor
children's false memories increase when provided with
lists that emphasize a single, thematic relationship. Concerning manipulations of associative relations, lists that
are high in backward associative strength produce more
false recall than lists low in backward associative strength,
but these lists do not exhibit different rates of true recall
(e.g., Howe et al., 2004). Moreover, Hege and Dodson
(2004) with adults and Howe (2006) with children have
shown that when associative processing is significantly reduced but semantic processing remains intact (e.g., using
pictorial stimuli rather than verbal stimuli; also see Chiarello, 1998), true recall rates are unaffected but false recall
rates are significantly reduced and age effects in false recall
rates disappear (also see Howe, 2008a).
Third, and perhaps the strongest evidence for an associative-activation model comes from research, already
mentioned, that has shown that associative strength is crucial for false memory production. The strength of the associative links between list items (e.g., bed) and the critical
lure (e.g., SLEEP), also termed backward associative
strength (BAS), is indicative of a list's ability to produce
false memories in children and adults. That is, lists with
very little mean BAS yield low rates of false memories (Gallo & Roediger, 2002; Howe et al., 2004). Similarly, recent
findings have indicated that the strength of associative
links between the critical lure (e.g., SLEEP) and the list
items (e.g., bed), also referred to as forward associative
strength (FAS), can influence the production of false memory in adults, although these studies only examined recognition (Brainerd & Wright, 2005).
Strictly speaking, the finding that associative strength
between list items and the critical lure, whether forward
or backward, plays a key role in adults' production of false
memories is difficult for gist-based theories to accommodate. For example, because BAS is a measure between list
items and their direct activation of the nonpresented critical lure, it is unclear what advantage accrues to such models by imposing the added step of having to first extract the
overall gist of the list before false memories are produced.
If BAS is a measure of the extent to which a presented item
directly activates nonpresented but related concepts, what
advantage is associated with imposing an intermediary
step (gist extraction) that makes this relationship indirect?
On the face of it, this seems to be a more complex explanation than is demanded by the data.
Alternatively, gist-based theories could always counter
with the assumption that BAS and FAS are proxy variables
for gist. Although it is clear that global measures such as
BAS and FAS can be further delineated (e.g., broken down
into different meaning components; see Brainerd, Yang,
Reyna, Howe, & Mills, in press;Roediger et al., 2001b), such

232

M.L. Howe et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 60 (2009) 229-251

arguments may still be problematic because associations
are typically viewed in the broadest sense, referring to
any set of concepts that can be mentally linked (e.g., contiguity, co-occurrence, taxonomic membership, conceptual,
orthographic, or phonemic similarity, and so forth) (see
Gallo, 2006; Howe, 2008b). Gist, on the other hand, is often
viewed as being more restricted, referring instead to a
theme ``. . . that subjects can form (and remember) to summarize or categorize the words" (Gallo, 2006, p. 40). Thus,
in contemporary models, gist is viewed as a subset of the
more general class of relationships between concepts denoted by the term association. Even if gist was to be broadened to encompass what has traditionally been the
province of associationism for well over a century and a
half (e.g., Hamilton, 1859), such theories can still founder
due to their insistence that the additional step of gist
extraction is necessary for the occurrence of false
memories.
Howe (2005, 2006, 2008b; Howe et al., 2008) has suggested that these same associative mechanisms that account for adults' false recall can also be used to
understand children's false memory illusions. Although
there is some support for this proposition, experiments
that have directly and systematically compared the impact
of variation in FAS or BAS on true and false rates have yet
to be conducted with children, something that is one focus
of the current research. Two studies have shown that variation in BAS does affect children's false recall and that
these effects are more pronounced for older than younger
children (e.g., Brainerd et al., 2006; Howe et al., 2004).
These and other recent findings suggest that developmental trends in false memory illusions are related to increases
in the activation of associative links that may already exist
between concepts rather than children's growing ability to
extract meaning across list items (i.e., gist-across-the-list).
As noted, associations are multidimensional and consist
of many different stimulus elements that overlap (e.g.,
phonological, orthographic, temporal contiguity, spatial
proximity, superordinate relations, property relations,
physical or conceptual similarity; also see Brainerd et al.,
in press; Roediger et al., 2001b). Associative strength is
determined by the relationship between items that exists
on the basis of any one dimension of similarity or may involve many dimensions that overlap. Research on children's memory organization has confirmed that
associative links between concepts appear at a relatively
young age and are further strengthened and defined with
increases in both knowledge and experience (Bjorklund,
1987; Frankel & Rollins, 1985). It has also been established
that children can use associative relations very early in life,
although the nature and type of association changes with
age and experience (e.g., Lange, 1978). Research on the
development of conceptual organization in memory has
indicated that both younger and older children rely on
associative (including categorical) links between concepts
to guide the recollection process (Bjorklund, 2004). With
development children gain more experience and knowledge and their ability to automatically activate and use
associative relations to guide recollection improves
(Bjorklund, 2004; Howe et al., 2008). Given that conditions
are made favorable, even very young children can activate

associative (including categorical) relations and use them
to mediate recollection (e.g., Frankel & Rollins, 1985). For
example, increasing the salience of categorical information
by blocking similar category items together can facilitate
the processing of such relations for young children (Howe,
Brainerd, & Kingma, 1985). Of course blocking information
by category is the same as presenting a DRM list--all items
are related to a prototype (category lists) or the one associative item (DRM lists).
Research on children's false memories has shown that
children as young as five years old, like older children
and adults, can spontaneously extract categorical relations
across word lists (Howe, 2006). In this study, young children's rates of true and false recall were not influenced
by the provision of superordinate category cues prior to list
presentation. Despite their ability to spontaneously extract
the thematic relationship across lists' items (i.e., category
lists were better recalled than DRM lists), young children's
rates of true and false recall remained lower than that of
older children and adults. Indeed, providing gist-consistent
descriptive cues did not increase children's false recall.
Even when categorical (e.g., banana, pear, orange) and
DRM items (e.g., core, red, pie) were used to cue the same
critical lure (e.g., APPLE), children's false recall rates are
controlled by variations in associative strength, not the
availability of an overarching, thematic cue (Howe, Wimmer, & Blease, in press). A tentative conclusion from research like this is that children's ability to extract
meaning across word lists is unrelated to their lower susceptibility to false memory illusions. Instead, as proposed
by theories relying on associative-activation, children's
false memories, like adults', result from the activation of
associative relations between list items and the critical
lure.
The role of associative strength in the production of
false memories has mostly focused on the influence of list
items' backward associative links to the critical lure and
has been limited to adults. Studies with adults have indicated that variations in a list's total, rather than mean,
BAS can directly influence the occurrence of false memories in the DRM paradigm (Robinson & Roediger, 1997).
More specifically, Robinson and Roediger (1997) found
that false recall increased in parallel with the addition of
related items to increase both list length and total associative strength. On the other hand, adding unrelated associates to keep list length constant did not change rates of
false recall, but rather was limited to decreasing rates of
true recall. Given these results, it appears that a list's total,
rather than mean, BAS influences false recall. Veridical recall, on the other hand, is diminished when unrelated
exemplars disrupt the associative coherence of a list.
Again, the effects of associative relations between list
items and the critical lure appear to be limited to false
memories.
Unlike BAS, FAS has not been significantly associated
with the production of false memories during free recall
(although this may be an artifact of the restricted range
or variability of measures of FAS). Indeed, previous studies
on false recall have failed to find a significant relationship
between FAS and false memories (see McEvoy et al., 1999;
Roediger et al., 2001b). However, recent findings have indi-

M.L. Howe et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 60 (2009) 229-251

cated that, when manipulated within lists mean forward
associative strength (MFAS), even when limited in range,
can influence false memory production in adults. Using
eight 4-item lists with varying BAS and FAS, Brainerd and
Wright (2005) found that lists with high FAS or BAS produced higher rates of false recognition. More specifically,
lists for which either FAS or BAS or both were high produced the highest proportions of false recognition. It appears that at least for recognition, adults' false memories
can be influenced by the lure's associative links to the list
items.
Overall, then, the effects of associative strength appear
to be stronger when it comes to the production of false recall, as true recall is often less affected by the strength or
direction of associative links between list items and the
critical lure. In addition, true and false recall are affected
differently by gist-like manipulations (e.g., ones that
emphasize vertical connectivity such as categorical or thematic structure) and associative coherence. Categorical or
thematic coherence of word lists has been found to influence rates of true but not false recall in both children
(Howe, 2006) and adults (Hutchison & Balota, 2005). In
fact, Hutchison and Balota (2005) found that increasing
the number of meaning-consistent items in word lists increased accurate recall without affecting rates of false recall. This was also found with children, for whom
category lists produced better true recall than DRM lists,
but there was no effect on children's false memories
(Howe, 2006; Howe et al., in press).
Although it is known that associative strength plays an
important role in the production of adult's false memories, few studies have examined these effects with children. The goal of this article is to provide more
definitive evidence of the primacy of associative-activation in the development of false memory illusions, linking
children's memory development in this domain to that
observed with adults. Although such memory continuity
effects have been observed in the development of accurate remembering (for a review, see Howe, 2000), the
same has not been true for false memory illusions. In
what follows, we present three experiments that examine
the role of associative strength in children's and adults'
false recall patterns. Across the experiments we seek evidence of the continuity of memory development. Along
the way, we provide a number of tests of FTT's and AAT's
predictions about developmental patterns of false memory illusions. We begin by describing the first two experiments, ones that provide tests of explicit manipulations
of gist (use of category lists and labels) and associative
strength (different variations in associative strength).
We then describe a third experiment, one in which gist
manipulations are more implicit (variation in the semantic cohesion or density of the list) and are directly contrasted with variation in associative strength. To
anticipate, the findings (a) are more consistent with AAT's
predictions of developmental patterns in false memory
illusions than FTT's and (b) provide strong evidence of
developmental continuity in the emergence of false memory illusions, consistent with that known to exist for the
development of accurate remembering.

233

Overview of experiments 1 and 2
As seen, developmental increases in false memory may
be related to the development of automaticity in associative-activation (AAT) rather than an inability to extract gist
across list items (FTT). In the first two experiments, we
examine this more closely by varying associative strength.
In the first experiment, we varied both BAS and FAS. In the
second experiment, we manipulated associative strength
by removing either the strongest BAS items from each list
or several weaker ones that reduced list BAS by the same
amount as removing the strongest associate. In order to
derive different predictions for FTT and AAT, associative
strength was varied across both categorical/thematic lists
and DRM lists. Although previous findings on the dissociation of true and false memories have shown that categorical/thematic information primarily affects true recall
(Howe, 2006; Hutchison & Balota, 2005), these effects have
been demonstrated using a between-subjects design. In order to examine this dissociation with more precision, we
examined the effects of category and associative (DRM)
lists using a within-subject design.
Both FTT and AAT predict that (a) true and false recall
should increase with age and (b) children's and adults' true
memories should be greater for category than for DRM
lists. However, the two theories differ when it comes to
false memory production. The key prediction from AAT is
that false memory should increase with increases in the
list's BAS independently of the greater gist salience for category than DRM lists. Thus, lists with high FAS and BAS
should generate more false memories than lists with lower
FAS and BAS (Experiment 1) and lists with higher BAS,
regardless of whether only a single strong item is removed
or several weak items are eliminated, should generate
more false memories than lists with lower BAS (Experiment 2). FTT, on the other hand, predicts the same outcome for false memory as it does for true memory. That
is, to the extent that categorical lists contain a single gist,
thereby increasing the probability that its gist will be more
easily discerned, category lists should produce higher false
memory rates than DRM lists which can contain multiple
``gists" or associative relations. FTT also predicts a developmental interaction. Because older children and adults are
more likely to apprehend these implicit cues, these effects
should be more pronounced with younger children. To our
knowledge, this will be the first time that the role of FAS
and BAS (Experiment 1) and overall list strength (Experiment 2) on false memories in categorized and DRM lists
has been examined developmentally.
A second manipulation was used to discriminate FTT
and AAT, namely, the provision of explicit cues (labels)
prior to list presentation, something that should prime
across-the-list gist. This should be the optimum time to
present gist cues as it has been shown that, at least for
adults, encoding is a primary locus of false memory formation for both category and DRM lists (Dewhurst, Bould,
Knott, & Thorley, 2009). For category lists, the category label was given prior to list presentation to cue the vertical
gist (e.g., ``fruit" was presented before reading the list
``orange, banana, . . ."). For DRM lists, a word or phrase

234

M.L. Howe et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 60 (2009) 229-251

describing what was common across the list was presented
(e.g., for the ``doctor" list, the cue was ``medical things"). As
noted earlier, AAT predicts that these labels should only increase false recall rates if they change the overall activation
of the critical lure (i.e., that they too are associatively related to the critical lure). FTT, on the other hand, predicts
that these labels should increase false recall rates, particularly in younger children who are said to be less able to
spontaneously extract gist-across-the-list.
Overall, then, according to the AAT, associative-activation is the crucial mechanism that accounts for children's
false memories and therefore false recall rates should be
directly related to fluctuations in associative strength. For
FTT, although false recall rates should increase with age,
gist manipulations should increase false recall rates in general, but also exhibit two different developmental effects.
(1) Category lists should yield higher false recall rates than
DRM lists, particularly for younger children who are less
able to extract gist spontaneously. This is because category
lists contain a single, dominant thematic connectivity
among items, something not always possessed by DRM
lists. (2) Explicit gist cues at encoding should also increase
false recall rates for both category and DRM lists, but particularly for younger children who are not as likely to extract gist spontaneously.
Experiment 1
In this experiment, BAS and FAS were varied systematically across both category and DRM lists, allowing us to
examine the role of associative relations in the development
of false memories independently of across-the-list-gist relations. The role of BAS in false memory production has been
well established in adult research but the role of FAS is less
clear. The few previous studies with adults have found small
significant effects for FAS that are much smaller than BAS effects, but these findings have been usually limited to measures of recognition. Given that gist plays a more important
role in recall, it is important to examine the relative influence
of BAS and FAS using this more gist-sensitive response measure. Moreover, the role of FAS in relation to BAS has never
been investigated in children's false memories and it is therefore crucial to explore this further. Although our implementation of this factor in this design was purely exploratory, it
was nonetheless expected that FAS would influence rates of
false memories. However, this effect may be limited to cases
where explicit cues were provided, particularly for children.
That is, although descriptive labels failed to increase rates of
true and false recall in children (Howe, 2006), levels of FAS
were not controlled in those studies. Results from research
with adults has indicated that for category lists, output frequency of the list items during the production of category
norms did influence rates of false recall when a descriptive
cue was provided (Smith, Ward, Tindell, Sifonis, & Wilkenfeld, 2000). Thus, although it was expected that young children are capable of extracting gist across the list without
explicit cues, descriptive labels of category lists, through
their forward associative links to the critical lure, may be
more effective in priming their list's top category exemplars
(the critical, unpresented item), resulting in higher false
memory rates for participants provided with descriptive la-

bels. A similar effect might occur for DRM lists. More specifically, descriptive labels could prime the DRM list items as
well as the critical lure in instances where backward (or forward) associative links were weak.
Method
Participants
A total of 250 children [48% male; 86 5-year-olds
(M = 5.5, SD = 5 months), 80 7-year-olds (M = 7.6, SD = 6
months), and 84 11-year-olds (M = 11.5, SD = 4 months)]
were recruited. All children (predominantly White and
middle-class) were tested following parental consent and
their own assent on the day of testing. A sample of 60
university students (M = 18.6, SD = 9 months) was also
recruited and tested following informed consent. Participants were randomly assigned to the label and no label
conditions, with half of the participants per age group
(50% male) assigned to each condition.
Design, materials, and procedure
A 2(List: DRM vs. Category)  3(Strength: High BASHigh FAS vs. High BAS-Low FAS vs. Low BAS-High FAS) 
4(Age: 5- vs. 7- vs. 11- vs. 18-year-olds)  2(Labels: No
labels vs. Labels) design was used where list and associative strength were manipulated within subject and age
and labels were between-subjects variables. (Note that a
Low BAS-Low FAS condition was not included because
such conditions routinely produce floor effects in false
memory rates).
Participants were tested individually in a quiet room.
Twelve 14-item lists (6 DRM lists and 6 category lists;
see Appendix A) were presented to each participant. Associative strength varied between lists with each participant
being exposed to four High BAS-High FAS lists (2 DRM and
2 category), four High BAS-Low FAS lists (2 DRM and 2 category), and four Low BAS-High FAS DRM lists (2 DRM and 2
category). Mean word frequencies did not differ for list
items, t(10) = 1.56, p = .15, or for critical lures between
DRM and category lists, t(10) = 1.41, p = .19. Neither did
mean word frequency differ for list items, F(2, 11) = 1.91,
p = .20, or for the critical lures between the three conditions (High/High vs. High/Low vs. Low/High), F(2, 11) =
1.18, p = .35 (word frequencies were taken from Stuart,
Masterson, Dixon, & Quinlan (1993-1996)).
Lists were read aloud by the experimenter at a 3-second
rate per item. Half of the participants in each age group received a descriptive label prior to hearing each list whereas
the other half did not. Descriptive labels for category lists
consisted of the category name included in the norms
(Van Overschelde, Rawson, & Dunlosky, 2004). Labels for
the DRM lists (see Appendix A) were constructed to highlight the shared semantic relations across list items and
were drawn from Roediger et al., 2001b. All lists have been
used previously with children and adults in these age
ranges (e.g., Brainerd et al., 2002; Howe, 2005, 2006,
2008a; Howe et al., 2008; Roediger et al., 2001b; Seamon,
Luo, Schlegel, Greene, & Goldberg, 2000). In order to connect the present research with previous studies investigating label effects, it was also necessary to use labels that
have already been implemented in prior research, ones

235

M.L. Howe et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 60 (2009) 229-251

that have been shown to affect false memory rates (e.g.,
Holliday et al., 2008). Finally, as in previous studies, the
critical target for category lists consisted of the highest frequency word (most typical exemplar) for the selected category. DRM and category lists were selected on the basis of
mean1 BAS and FAS as determined using the University of
South Florida norms (Nelson, McEvoy, & Schreiber, 1999).
In cases where associative strength was not available, the
Edinburgh Associative Thesaurus (EAT) was consulted (Kiss,
Armstrong, Milroy, & Piper, 1973). DRM lists were also selected on the basis of mean BAS and FAS as indicated in
the Roediger et al., 2001b norms. Mean FAS and BAS are
shown in Table 1.
Prior to the presentation of the first list, participants
were given general memory instructions to listen carefully
to the words on the list as they would be asked to recall the
words later. Following these instructions, participants in
the label condition were given a descriptive label describing the theme of the list prior to list presentation. Participants in the no label condition simply received the word
list. Following list presentation, participants were given a
30-second distractor task (circling randomized pairs of letters) prior to recall. Once recall was complete, the next cycle began. This procedure was repeated for the remaining
11 lists. Items were presented in the usual descending order of BAS. All presentation and recall was oral and list order was randomized within each age group.
Results and discussion
Preliminary analyses indicated no main effect or interactions involving gender so this variable was eliminated
from subsequent analyses. Consistent with the hypotheses
for this study, rates of true and false recall will be analyzed
separately. Throughout this article, effect sizes (g2) refer to
partial eta2.

1
Although total backward associative strength is often preferred over
mean backward associative strength, we used mean strength in order to
provide a correspondence to the metric preferred for variation in forward
associative strength. Because in our case mean and total backward
associative strength were correlated, using the mean as the metric for
backward associative strength did not serve to compromise the findings.
2
Spreading activation models (e.g., Anderson, 1983; Anderson & Bower,
1973; Collins & Loftus, 1975) assume that presented items activate their
memory representations and this activation spreads to other words via
links throughout an associative network. Because list items are associated
with the unpresented critical lure, this lure is activated numerous times (11
to 15 times in our experiments, depending on the list being studied) and is
later falsely included in the recall set. Current models of false memory
production in children and adults, while still relying on associative
connectivity, contain more complicated, multiplicative encoding and
retrieval rules than those of earlier models (e.g., see Kimball, Smith, &
Kahana, 2007). Although the details of this model are not critical for current
purposes, it is important to note that unlike earlier models in which
associative strength between items and critical lures was the key determinant of false recall rates, these newer fSAM models also place importance on associations among studied items (intralist connectivity). Because
of the importance of intralist connectivity, variation in strength across all of
the items on the list, not individual items, becomes more central in
determining false recall rates in these models. Thus, like the associativeactivation theory, newer spreading-activation models would also predict no
differences in false recall rates as a function of whether one strong item or
several weaker items were removed from the list, just the overall
associative strength of the list.

Table 1
Mean backward and forward associative strength for each variation of
category and DRM lists.
Associative strength

Category

High BAS-high FAS
High BAS-low FAS
Low BAS-high FAS

DRM

MBAS

MFAS

MBAS

MFAS

.150
.080
.070

.040
.020
.030

.234
.235
.010

.062
.028
.061

Note. BAS = backward associative strength; FAS = forward associative
strength; MBAS = mean backward associative strength of a list;
MFAS = mean forward associative strength of a list.

True recall
The proportion of items correctly recalled was analyzed
using a 2(List: DRM vs. category)  3(Strength: High BASHigh FAS vs. High BAS-Low FAS vs. Low BAS-High
FAS)  2(Label: No label vs. label)  4(Age: 5-, 7-, 11-,
and 18-year-olds) analysis of variance (ANOVA). The results showed a main effect for list, F(1, 302) = 242.23,
p < .001, g2 = .45, where the mean proportion of true recall
for category lists (M = .44) was greater than that for DRM
lists (M = .35). There was also a main effect for age, F(3,
302) = 487.47, p < .001, g2 = .83, where post-hoc Newman-Keuls tests (p < .05) revealed that 5-year-olds
(M = .18) recalled less than 7-year-olds (M = .30) who recalled less than 11-year-olds (M = .43) who recalled less
than 18-year-olds (M = .67). Finally, there was a main effect for strength, F(2, 604) = 49.71, p < .001, g2 = .14, where
post-hoc tests showed that BAS was the critical determinant for true recall, with High BAS-High FAS lists
(M = .41) and High BAS-Low FAS lists (M = .41) yielding
more true recall than Low BAS-High FAS lists (M = .37).
In addition, four first-order interactions emerged, three
of which involved age. The one interaction that did not involve age was between List  Strength, F(2, 604) = 42.63,
p < .001, g2 = .12, where post-hoc tests confirmed that
although High BAS yielded the best recall for both DRM
and category lists, and that category lists were better recalled than DRM lists, each list type had a unique ordering
of strength relations. That is, for DRM lists, the ordering
was High BAS-High FAS (M = .38) > High BAS-Low FAS
(M = .34) > Low BAS-High FAS (M = .33), whereas for the
category lists the ordering was High BAS-Low FAS
(M = .48) > High BAS-High FAS (M = .43) > Low BAS-High
FAS (M = .40).
The three interactions involving age were as follows.
First, there was an Age  List interaction, F(3, 302) = 9.56,
p < .001, g2 = .09. As can be seen in the left panel of Table
2, and was confirmed by post-hoc tests, although category

Table 2
Mean proportion of true and false recall as a function of age and list in
Experiment 1 (standard errors in parentheses).
Age

5-year-olds
7-year-olds
11-year-olds
18-year-olds

True recall

False recall

DRM lists

Category lists

DRM lists

Category lists

.14
.24
.37
.65

.22
.36
.48
.69

.10
.20
.30
.44

.17
.30
.37
.38

(.009)
(.010)
(.010)
(.011)

(.010)
(.011)
(.011)
(.013)

(.020)
(.020)
(.020)
(.023)

(.023)
(.024)
(.024)
(.028)

236

M.L. Howe et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 60 (2009) 229-251

lists were better recalled than DRM lists at all ages, this gap
increased with age up until 11-year-olds and then decreased with adults. Second, there was an Age  Strength
interaction, F(6, 604) = 22.73, p < .001, g2 = .18. As can be
seen in the left panel of Table 3, and was confirmed by
post-hoc tests, there were no differences in true recall
due to strength for 5- and 7-year-olds but the two High
BAS lists were better recalled than the Low BAS list for
11- and 18-year-olds. Third and last, there was an
Age  Label interaction, F(3, 302) = 5.02, p < .01, g2 = .05.
As can be seen in Table 4 and was confirmed by post-hoc
tests, label conditions were better than no labels conditions for all child age groups but there were no differences
for adults.
Although some of these patterns for FAS (Brainerd &
Wright, 2005) and category versus DRM lists (Howe,
2006; Seamon et al., 2000) have been observed in prior
studies, many have not been previously reported. For
example, all age groups tended to recall more targets for
category than DRM lists but only older children and adults
true recall was affected by variation in associative strength.
Interestingly, descriptive labels aided all children's true recall by approximately the same magnitude (also see Howe,
2006), but had no effect on adults' true recall. A full discussion of these trends will be deferred until after the false recall findings are presented.

Table 4
Mean proportion of true recall as a function of age and label in Experiment
1 (standard errors in parentheses).
Age

No labels

5-year-olds
7-year-olds
11-year-olds
18-year-olds

.17
.28
.41
.69

Labels

(.012)
(.012)
(.012)
(.014)

.19
.32
.45
.64

(.012)
(.012)
(.012)
(.014)

DRM (M = .26) and category (M = .26) lists in the no label
condition, but rates of false recall were higher for category
(M = .35) than DRM (M = .27) lists when labels were present. Importantly, as we show subsequently, consistent
with AAT but not FTT, this effect was due to higher associative strength relations between labels and the critical lures
in category than DRM lists.
There were two other main effects, one for age, F(3,
302) = 40.59, p < .001, g2 = .29, where post-hoc NewmanKeuls tests (p < .05) revealed that 5-year-olds (M = .14) falsely recalled less than 7-year-olds (M = .25) who falsely recalled less than 11-year-olds (M = .34) who falsely recalled
less than 18-year-olds (M = .41), and one for strength, F(2,
604) = 114.45, p < .001, g2 = .28, where post-hoc tests
showed that, like true recall, BAS was the critical determinant for false recall, with High BAS-High FAS lists (M = .35)
and High BAS-Low FAS lists (M = .35) yielding more false
recall than Low BAS-High FAS lists (M = .15). Three more
first-order interactions emerged as well as a second-order
interaction. First, there was a List  Strength, F(2,
604) = 107.25, p < . 001, g2 = .26, where post-hoc tests confirmed that although High BAS yielded the greatest false
recall for both DRM and category lists, like true recall, each
list type had a unique ordering of strength relations. That
is, for DRM lists, the ordering was High BAS-High FAS
(M = .45) > High BAS-Low FAS (M = .26) > Low BAS-High
FAS (M = .08), whereas for the category lists the ordering
was High BAS-Low FAS (M = .45) > High BAS-High FAS
(M = .25) > Low BAS-High FAS (M = .22). These patterns
for false recall are the same as those obtained for true recall. Second, there was an Age  List interaction, F(3,
302) = 6.16, p < .001, g2 = .09. As can be seen in the right
panel of Table 2, and was confirmed by post-hoc tests, category lists yielded higher false recall than DRM lists up to
11-year-olds and then no difference for adults. Third, there
was an Age  Strength interaction, F(6, 604) = 19.17,
p < .001, g2 = .16. As can be seen in the right panel of Table
3, and was confirmed by post-hoc tests, there were no differences in false recall due to strength for 5-year-olds but

False recall
The proportion of critical lures falsely recalled was analyzed using a 2(List: DRM vs. category)  3(Strength: High
BAS-High FAS vs. High BAS-Low FAS vs. Low BAS-High
FAS)  2(Label: No label vs. label)  4(Age: 5-, 7-, 11-,
and 18-year-olds) ANOVA. The results showed a main effect for list, F(1, 302) = 10.29, p < .001, g2 = .03, where the
mean proportion of false recall for category lists (M = .31)
was greater than that for DRM lists (M = .26). Recall that
previous research has not found differences in false memory rates across list type (Howe, 2006; Howe et al., in
press). That such an effect was obtained here might cause
some to interpret this as evidence for FTT, particularly as
average BAS was lower for category than DRM lists, suggesting that something other than BAS (e.g., gist) was driving false memory rates. However, such an interpretation
would be incorrect. Not only was there a main effect for label, F(1, 302) = 7.14, p < .01, g2 = .02, where no labels resulted in lower false recall rates (M = .26) than labels
(M = .31), but, more important, a List  Label interaction,
F(1, 302) = 7.32, p < .01, g2 = .02. Post-hoc tests showed
that there were no differences in false recall rates for

Table 3
Mean proportion of true and false recall as a function of age and associative strength in Experiment 1 (standard errors in parentheses).
Age

5-year-olds
7-year-olds
11-year-olds
18-year-olds

True recall

False recall

High BAS
High FAS

High BAS
Low FAS

Low BAS
High FAS

High BAS
High FAS

High BAS
Low FAS

Low BAS
High FAS

.18
.30
.44
.71

.19
.30
.45
.70

.19
.30
.40
.59

.12
.28
.36
.63

.19
.35
.45
.43

.10
.12
.21
.18

(.010)
(.010)
(.010)
(.012)

(.010)
(.010)
(.010)
(.012)

(.010)
(.010)
(.010)
(.012)

(.026)
(.026)
(.026)
(.031)

(.027)
(.028)
(.027)
(.033)

(.018)
(.019)
(.018)
(.021)

M.L. Howe et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 60 (2009) 229-251

the two High BAS lists yielded higher false recall than the
Low BAS lists for 7-, 11-, and 18-year-olds.
Finally, there was an Age  List  Strength interaction,
F(6, 604) = 8.78, p < .001, g2 = .08. As can be seen in Panels
A and B of Fig. 1, and was confirmed by post-hoc tests, both
the High BAS-High FAS and High BAS-Low FAS lists produced greater false recall than Low BAS-High FAS lists for
all age groups. The interaction occurs because (a) for category lists, High BAS-Low FAS lists produced greater false
recall for children but the reverse held for adults and (b)
for DRM lists, false recall rates were greater for High
BAS-High FAS lists than High BAS-Low FAS lists for all
age groups except the youngest (5-year-olds). Thus, false
memories increased with age like true memories. As well,

237

BAS was strongly predictive of false recall levels. That is,
strong associative relations in both directions (High BASHigh FAS) increased false recall rates for DRM and category
lists for adults and increased false recall rates for children
on DRM lists. The pattern is less clear for category lists
where High BAS-Low FAS but not High BAS-High FAS
increased false recall rates for children. However, despite
this, the overall pattern is very consistent: in all cases,
high BAS had a significant effect on children's false
memory production and this was independent of gist
manipulations.
Together, these results are more consistent with the
predictions from AAT's conceptualization of false memory
and its development than with FTT's. That is, false recall

Fig. 1. Mean proportion falsely recalled as a function of Age and Strength for Category lists (Panel A) and DRM lists (Panel B) for Experiment 1.

238

M.L. Howe et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 60 (2009) 229-251

rates were directly related to the list's associative strength,
particularly BAS, regardless of whether those lists were
mainly associative (DRM) or categorical. In fact, whereas
true recall was negatively (but not significantly) related
to BAS (r(11) = .125, p = .35; category r(5) = .112; DRM
r(5) = .145), false recall was positively (and significantly)
related to BAS (r(11) = .505, p < .05; category r(5) = .408;
DRM r(5) = .534). This dissociation was observed regardless of whether labels were present or not and whether
lists were DRM or categorical.
Interestingly, when false recall rates were higher in category than DRM lists, this effect was restricted to conditions in which category labels were explicitly presented
prior to the category list itself. That is, for false recall,
regardless of age, descriptive labels selectively increased
(primed) rates of false recollection for category but not
DRM lists. Although at first blush this may be seen as consistent with FTT's claim that labels aided children's and
adults' processing of gist across the list, it is not. First, if
such were the case, we would have anticipated the same
effects for DRM lists when given an appropriate organizing
label. This was not observed. Second, FTT anticipates an
interaction of labeling with age. That is, because younger
children are particularly deficient in gist processing, the
labeling effect should have been larger for younger children than older children and adults. Again, no such interaction emerged, a finding consistent with that of Holliday
et al. (2008).
Third, and finally, it turns out that that this finding is
consistent with AAT's prediction that labels can serve to increase false memory rates when they increase associativeactivation of the critical lure. That is, this effect appears to
be most likely related to the strong associative relations
between the critical lure and descriptive labels for category, but not DRM, lists. In fact, further investigation revealed stronger associative relations between the critical
lures (top exemplars from category norms) and the
descriptive labels for category lists (M = .34) than for
DRM lists (M = .13) and this difference is significant,
t(10) = 2.06, p < .05. Using a partial correlational analysis
and holding list BAS constant, associative strength from
the label to the lure was a significant predictor of false recall in category lists (r(3) = .814, p < .05) but not DRM lists
(r(3) = .229, p = .36). Thus, rather than providing support
for FTT these findings provide further evidence for the
important role that associative strength plays in the false
memory illusion, regardless of age. Consistent with the
earlier suggestion that labels may increase false memory
because they increase associative-activation of the critical
lure, and not because they increase gist extraction rates
per se (e.g., Holliday et al., 2008; Odegard et al., 2008),
these findings show that both list-to-lure and label-to-lure
associative strength contribute independently to false
memory illusions.
Interestingly, when descriptive labels were not provided, false recall for DRM and category lists did not significantly differ and, as suggested by AAT, false recall varied
solely as a function of associative strength. Overall, then,
for all lists associative strength, particularly BAS, played a
key role in determining false memory rates. Although
FAS was also important, particularly for DRM lists, devel-

opmental trends were controlled mainly by BAS. These results are consistent with previous findings with children
(Howe,2005, 2006) and tend to favor an associative-activation approach to the development false memory illusions.
Experiment 2
The second experiment was designed to further examine the role of associative strength in the development of
false memories by implementing a different type of
manipulation. Specifically, we varied whether the list contained all items (normal or intact lists), all of the items
except the strongest BAS term (strongest item removed),
or all of the items except for several weaker items, ones
that summed to the same BAS value as the strongest item
removed (weak items removed), for both DRM and category lists. According to AAT, if BAS plays the primary role
in false recall, then regardless of whether a single strong
item is removed or several weaker items are removed
that sum to the same BAS value as the strongest one, then
there should be no difference in false memory rates for
strong and weak lists but both should have lower false
memory rates than lists with higher associative strength
(the intact list). Although neither FTT nor AAT makes specific predictions about different rates of spreading activation2, some spreading activation models suggest that
removing stronger items would produce lower activation
levels of the critical lure because there may exist higher
rates of spreading activation from a single, strong item
than the summative strength of removing several weaker
items. If so, then removing a stronger item should have
more of an impact on false recall than removing several
weaker items whose individual strengths do not carry
as much weight in an associative network (for a more
in-depth analysis of priming effects, see Tse & Neely,
2007).
This manipulation also provides a test of Deese's (1959)
and Underwood's (1965) different hypotheses about the
importance of associative strength versus the importance
of number of associates creating implicit associative responses (IARs) (also see Robinson & Roediger, 1997). For
Deese (1959), false recall rates are correlated with BAS of
the list words to the critical lure--lists with higher BAS
should have higher false recall than lists with lower BAS
regardless of the number of items in the list. Implicit in
Underwood's (1965) theory, false recall rates although affected by BAS are also correlated with the number of IARs
generated to the unpresented critical lure. The more items
presented that generate IARs to the critical lure the more
likely it is that the critical lure will be falsely remembered.
Thus, according to Underwood (1965), lists with more
items removed (our weaker items removed conditions)
should result in fewer false recollections than lists with
one item removed (our stronger item removed conditions)
despite no overall differences in BAS (assuming that even
the weakest item removed would have produced an IAR).
For Deese (1959), no differences should emerge in false
recollection rates between these two conditions because
BAS remains constant. The only difference that should appear is between the intact lists and those with reduced
BAS.

M.L. Howe et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 60 (2009) 229-251

In previous studies, researchers have examined variations in list length on false recollection rates, although they
have not controlled for levels of BAS. For example, Robinson and Roediger (1997) varied the number of items presented from 3 to 15 and found a linear increase in adults'
false memory rates with list length (ranging from 3% to
30%). Although they left the three highest BAS items in
each list, they did not measure the variation in BAS systematically across list length. Sugrue and Hayne (2006)
also varied list length (7 items vs. 14 items), leaving the
top seven BAS items in each list, but did not systematically
vary BAS with list length. They found that longer lists increased false recall rates by 127% for adults and 48% for
children (9- and 10-year-olds).
To our knowledge, this is the first experiment to simultaneously vary list length while keeping BAS constant. This
methodology not only permits a test of the Deese (1959)
and Underwood (1965) hypotheses, but also of AAT's claim
that BAS, not number of items, is critical to false memory
production in children and adults. As in Experiment 1,
we also examined FTT's claims about the importance of
across-the-list-gist by examining the effects of labels
(present versus absent) and list type (DRM vs. category).
That is, we examined the claim that younger children
should produce more false memories when explicit gist
cues were available than when they were not as well as
whether younger children were more likely to produce
false recall when categorized lists were presented than
when DRM lists were presented. In order to provide a better controlled test of this hypothesis in Experiment 2, we
equated the associative-activation of the labels to the lure
across DRM and category lists.
Method
Participants
A new sample of 210 children and adults participated
(53% male) in this experiment. There were 47 5-year-olds
(M = 5.4, SD = 3 months), 50 7-year-olds (M = 7.4, SD = 4
months), 53 11-year-olds (M = 11.4, SD = 4 months), and
60 18-year-olds (M = 18.6, SD = 8 months). The children
were White, came from middle-class homes, and were
tested following parental consent and their assent on the
testing day. Adults were tested following signed, informed
consent. Participants were randomly assigned to the label
and no label conditions, with half of the participants per
age group (50% male) assigned to each condition.
Design, materials, and procedure
A 2(List: DRM vs. Category)  3(Item removed: none vs.
strongest vs. weaker)  4(Age: 5- vs. 7- vs. 11- vs. 18-yearolds)  2(Labels: No labels vs. Labels) design was used
where list and item removed were manipulated within
subject and age and labels were between-subjects
variables.
A different set of 12, 15-item lists (6 DRM lists drawn
fromRoediger et al., 2001b, and 6 category lists drawn from
van Overschelde et al., 2004; see Appendix B) were presented to each participant. As in Experiment 1, half of the
participants received a label before list presentation and
half received no label. Unlike in Experiment 1, the associa-

239

tive strength between the label and the critical lure did not
differ significantly between DRM (M = .11) and category
lists (M = .25), t(10) = 1.16, p > .10. The item(s) removed
varied between lists with each participant being exposed
to 4 lists in which nothing was removed (2 DRM and 2 category), four lists in which the strongest BAS item was removed (2 DRM and 2 category), and four lists in which
the weakest BAS items were removed (2 DRM and 2 category). For the latter two types of lists, the cumulative BAS
for each list was held constant such that the BAS associated
with the strongest item removed equaled that of the BAS
associated with the weakest items removed (see Appendix
B). Although list length varied, particularly when weak
items were removed (i.e., from a high of 13 presented
items to a low of 11 presented items), all lists exceeded
10 items and are above the threshold necessary to produce
false recollections in both children and adults (see Sugrue
& Hayne, 2006).
Mean word frequency did not differ for list items,
t(10) = 1.27, p = 0.23, or for critical lures, t(10) = 1.03,
p = 0.33, between DRM and category lists. In addition,
there were no differences for word frequency for list items,
F(2, 35) = 2.70, p = 0.75 between the three conditions (intact vs. strongest removed vs. weaker removed) (word frequencies were taken from Stuart et al. (1993-1996)). Thus,
the removal of list items did not affect mean word frequency values of the lists.
Each list, DRM and category, appeared in every possible condition. That is, each DRM and category list appeared as an intact list, as a strongest item removed
list, and as a several weaker items removed list either
with or without a label (varied across participants). Because of these controls, ones that were not possible in
Experiment 1 (because lists were constrained by their
associative strength values), we can exclude the possibility of lists effects in Experiment 2.
Participants were tested individually in a quiet room.
Items were read aloud by the experimenter at a 3-second
rate. Half of the participants in each age group received a
descriptive label prior to hearing each list whereas the
other half did not. Descriptive labels for category lists consisted of the category name included in the norms (van
Overschelde et al., 2004) and for the DRM lists were constructed to highlight the shared semantic relations across
list items and were drawn from Roediger et al. (2001b)
(see Appendix B). As before, all lists have been used previously with children and adults in these age ranges (e.g.,
Brainerd et al., 2002; Howe, 2005, 2006, 2008a; Howe
et al., 2008; Roediger et al., 2001b; Seamon et al., 2000),
the labels have been used previously (e.g., Holliday et al.,
2008; Howe, 2006), and, as is the norm with category associate lists, the critical target for category lists was the highest frequency word (most typical exemplar) for the
selected category. DRM and category lists were selected
on the basis of mean BAS as determined using the University of South Florida norms (Nelson et al., 1999). Like
Experiment 1, in cases where associative strength was
not available, the Edinburgh Associative Thesaurus was
consulted (Kiss et al., 1973). DRM lists were also selected
on the basis of mean BAS as indicated in the Roediger
et al. (2001) norms.

240

M.L. Howe et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 60 (2009) 229-251

Prior to the presentation of the first list, participants
were given general memory instructions to listen carefully
to the words on the list, as they would be asked to recall
the words later. Following these instructions, participants
in the label condition were given a descriptive label
describing the theme of the list prior to list presentation.
Participants in the no label condition simply received the
word list. Following list presentation, participants were given a 30-second distractor task (circling randomized pairs
of letters) prior to recall. Once recall was complete, the
next cycle began. This procedure was repeated for the
remaining 11 lists. Items were presented in the usual
descending order of BAS. All presentation and recall was
oral and list order was randomized within each age group.

tantly, there was also an Age  Item removed interaction,
F(6, 404) = 10.45, p < .001, g2 = .13. As can be seen in the
left panel of Table 6, and confirmed by post-hoc tests, there
were no differences in recall as a function of items removed for 5- and 7-year-olds, whereas 11-year-olds recalled significantly fewer items from the weak-itemsremoved list than the strong-item-removed and intact
(normal) lists. This trend continued for adults who recalled
the least from the weak-items-removed lists than the
strong-item-removed lists and the most from intact lists.
Thus, rather than being a list strength effect per se, amount
recalled was positively correlated with list length for both
older children and adults. Finally, there were no effects
associated with label. It would seem that when lists are
better controlled than in the first experiment, the label effect disappears.

Results and discussion

False recall
The proportion of critical lures falsely recalled was
analyzed using a 2(List: DRM vs. Category)  3(Item removed: none vs. strongest vs. weaker)  4(Age: 5- vs.
7- vs. 11- vs. 18-year-olds)  2(Labels: No labels vs. Labels) ANOVA. There were three main effects. First, there
was a main effect for age, F(3, 202) = 14.79, p < .001,
g2 = .18, where post-hoc tests confirmed that false recall
increased significantly across age. That is, 5-year-olds
(M = .17) falsely recalled fewer critical items than 7year-olds (M = .25) who recalled fewer false items than
11-year-olds (M = .33) who recalled fewer false items
than adults (M = .40). Second, there was a main effect
for list, F(1, 202) = 88.31, p < .001, g2 = .30, where there
were more false memories for DRM lists (M = .36) than
for category lists (M = .22) a finding more typical in this
literature for false recall and the opposite pattern to that
for true recall both for children (Howe, 2006; Howe
et al., in press) and adults (Dewhurst et al., 2009). Finally, there was a main effect for item removed, F(2,
404) = 144.79, p < .001, g2 = .42, where post-hoc tests
confirmed that intact lists (M = .44) exhibited more false
recall than either the strong-item-removed lists (M = .21)
or weak-items-removed lists (M = .21), these latter two
conditions did not differ. Importantly, unlike true recall,
the effect for false recall would appear to be strength
based rather than length based inasmuch as removing
the same amount of BAS from a list, regardless of
whether it was a single strong item or several weaker
ones, halved average false recall rates. A 50% decline in
false recall rates is consistent with previous research
with children and adults (e.g., Sugrue & Hayne, 2006).

Preliminary analyses showed that gender was not a
source of significant variation and was eliminated from
subsequent analyses. As before, true recall findings are presented first followed by false recall.
True recall
The proportion of correct responses was analyzed using
a 2(List: DRM vs. Category)  3(Item removed: none vs.
strongest vs. weaker)  4(Age: 5- vs. 7- vs. 11- vs. 18year-olds)  2(Labels: No labels vs. Labels) ANOVA. There
was a main effect for list, F(1, 202) = 145.33, p < .001,
g2 = .42, where category lists (M = .40) were better recalled
than DRM lists (M = .34), and a main effect for age, F(3,
202) = 379.08, p < .001, g2 = .85, where post-hoc tests
showed that 5-year-olds (M = .17) recalled less than 7year-olds (M = .27) who recalled less than 11-year-olds
(M = .40) who recalled less than 18-year-olds (M = .64).
These effects were modified by an Age  List interaction,
F(3, 202) = 3.94, p < .01, g2 = .06. As seen in Table 5, and
confirmed by post-hoc tests, although category lists were
recalled better than DRM lists at all ages, the absolute magnitude of these differences increased with age. Impor-

Table 5
Mean proportion of true recall as a function of age and list in Experiment 2
(standard errors in parentheses).
Age

DRM lists

5-year-olds
7-year-olds
11-year-olds
18-year-olds

.15
.24
.36
.61

Category lists

(.012)
(.012)
(.011)
(.011)

.18
.30
.44
.67

(.013)
(.012)
(.012)
(.011)

Table 6
Mean proportion of true and false recall as a function of age and items removed in Experiment 2 (standard errors in parentheses).
Age

True recall
Intact

5-year-olds
7-year-olds
11-year-olds
18-year-olds

.18
.27
.43
.68

(.014)
(.013)
(.013)
(.012)

False recall

Strong
Removed

Weak
Removed

.16
.26
.41
.64

.16
.27
.36
.61

(.015)
(.014)
(.014)
(.013)

(.013)
(.013)
(.012)
(.012)

Intact
.28
.38
.49
.60

(.041)
(.040)
(.039)
(.036)

Strong
Removed

Weak
Removed

.11
.19
.25
.30

.10
.18
.24
.30

(.030)
(.029)
(.029)
(.027)

(.029)
(.028)
(.027)
(.025)

M.L. Howe et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 60 (2009) 229-251

However, it should be noted that this 50% decline occurred with only a 24% reduction in BAS. What this
shows is that changes in BAS do not map one-to-one
onto changes in false memory rates, at least not for recall. In addition, this result shows that when BAS is systematically controlled and list length is varied, it is
activation strength that determines false recall rates in
children and adults not list length. This finding is
consistent with AAT's predictions as well as Deese's
(1959) hypothesis concerning the importance of BAS
not list length in determining false recollection rates.
Importantly, the finding that strong and weak lists exhibit exactly the same false memory rates excludes the
possibility that variation in list length may account for
the findings. This is inconsistent with the interpretation
of Underwood's (1965) implicit hypothesis where the
number of IARs determines false recollection rates but
consistent with the interpretation that stronger items
are more likely to evoke an IAR than weaker items.
Interestingly, as can be seen in the right panel of Table
6, the difference between intact and changed lists tends
to increase with age. However, this interaction was not
significant. Finally, unlike the predictions of FTT,
false recall rates were not affected by label, a
finding consistent with previous research (e.g., Howe,
2006).
Summary and comparison of experiments 1 and 2
The pattern for true recall across both experiments
was extremely consistent and showed that category lists
were better recalled than DRM lists. This is consistent
with previous findings (e.g., Howe 2006; Howe et al.,
in press). Differences occurred between experiments in
the label manipulation where Experiment 1 showed increased children's (but not adults') true recall when a
label was presented, whereas Experiment 2 did not reveal any differences between label and no label
conditions.
For false recall, both experiments showed that BAS
between list items and the critical lure is a key determinant for false memory production in children and adults.
However, like true recall, differences occurred for the label manipulation. Experiment 1 showed a higher level of
false recall for category lists but not for DRM lists when
a label was presented. In contrast, Experiment 2 revealed
no differences in false memory rates between the
label and no label conditions. Further analyses showed
that this label effect in Experiment 1 was due to the
higher level of associative-activation between the label
and the critical lure in category than DRM lists. It seems
that when the associative strength between the label
and the critical lure is better equated across DRM and
category lists, as it was in Experiment 2, the label effect
disappears.
Interestingly, for the no label conditions, the findings of
the two experiments differ slightly in how BAS affects false
recall. That is, in Experiment 1 variation in BAS did not
have as strong an effect on 5-year-old's false recall as it
did on all of the other age groups. This may be due to the
lower false memory rate for this younger age group in

241

Experiment 1 than Experiment 2. That is, both high BAS/
high FAS and high BAS/low FAS conditions in Experiment
1 showed lower false memory rates than intact lists in
Experiment 2. Although false recall rates were generally
higher for all children in Experiment 2 than Experiment
1, they were not significantly different across experiments
(F < 1) and were not attributable to differences in word frequency across lists (t(22) = 0.79, p = .44) or across critical
lures (t(22) = -1.42, p = .17). However, the effects of BAS
may have been obscured for the youngest children in the
first experiment by possible floor effects, effects that were
not present in 5-year-old's false recall in the second
experiment.
Despite these modest differences in results across
experiments, the overall pattern is very clear. As previous research suggests, children are better at remembering category lists than DRM lists. False memories are
driven by the amount of associative strength between
the list items and the critical lure (BAS). Providing a
descriptive label for the list items overall does not, in
and of itself, increase false memory levels. Labels only
have an effect on false memory production when they
show high levels of association to the critical lure. Again,
this indicates that the level of association to the critical
lure is the significant determinant for children's false
memory production.
Moreover, both experiments demonstrate that true recall is affected more by gist factors whereas false recall is
affected by associative strength. These outcomes are more
consistent with AAT than FTT particularly inasmuch as gist
manipulations (i.e., category vs. DRM lists, gist-integrating
labels vs. no labels) primarily affect true, not false, recall.
Indeed, in some strong versions of FTT, specific gist manipulations are said to primarily affect false, not true, recall:
``FTT predicts that the effects of the semantic cue instructions should only be found in false recall of critical lures
because true recall of list words is based on verbatim
traces" (Holliday et al., 2008, p. 70). To the contrary, both
Experiments 1 and 2 show that variation in false recall
rates are controlled by associative strength, not gist,
manipulations.
Despite the clear pattern of results, one question that
arises is whether a direct comparison between category
lists and DRM lists is appropriate since they have different semantic structures. According to Wu and Barsalou
(2007) there are six types of semantic relations that
can occur between words: antonymy (words of opposite
value, e.g., cold and hot), entity (entity-property relationships between words, e.g., chair and wood), introspective
(mental state-property relationships between words, e.g.,
happy and sun), situational (words are related to the
same association, e.g., medical treatment), synonymy
(words that have the same meaning, e.g., bunny and rabbit), and taxonomy (words that belong to the same taxonomic category, e.g., cats and dogs are both animals).
Although it is often difficult to discriminate associative
strength and semantic overlap (see Hutchison, 2003),
Brainerd et al. (in press) suggest that DRM lists contain
many of these semantic relations whereas categorical
lists contain only taxonomic relations. The meaning connections in categorical lists are therefore less varied than

242

M.L. Howe et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 60 (2009) 229-251

in DRM lists. If so, one could argue that extracting the
overall meaning from word lists is easier when there is
a larger variety or different types of semantic relations
available. Alternatively, and more likely, such lists may
lead to multiple gists, leading to more confusion than
when only a single gist is present. Thus, it may be easier
to extract the overall meaning from lists when only one
type of semantic relation (e.g., a taxonomic relation) is
available. This might be particularly true for children
who may have more difficulty juggling multiple relations
in a list. That is, children may be better with lists containing a single relation, especially when it comes to
extracting the gist of a list. Because categorized lists contain only one semantic relation (i.e., taxonomy) they are
thematically more consistent than DRM lists. For this
reason extraction of a separate thematic representation
should be easier for thematically more consistent material (i.e., categorized lists) than for materials that have
different types of relations (i.e., DRM lists). If extraction
of thematic representations (i.e., gist extraction) of presented material is responsible for false memories as suggested by FTT, then a higher level of false memories in
categorized lists that are thematically more consistent
than DRM lists would be expected. However, this is not
consistent with the present findings.
Given findings from these experiments as well as
other recent findings (e.g., Howe, 2006; Howe et al.,
2008, in press), a reasonable conclusion is that at a minimum, gist-like manipulations can and do affect children's true recall and associative strength can and does
affect their false recall. In Experiments 1 and 2 we
manipulated the availability of gist processing by varying whether participants studied DRM or categorized
lists and by explicitly cuing or not cuing key semantic
relationships across list items using labels. As just discussed, these are powerful manipulations that have as
their locus of effect, true recall. In fact, across a number
of experiments now it appears as though effects at false
recall may be limited to variation primarily in BAS. Of
course, some might argue that gist manipulations, despite having substantial effects on true recall, did not affect false recall rates because of lack of power. However,
such arguments founder given the sheer number of participants for which such effects have been relatively
weak or absent (Ns are now well over 1000) and the
number of times these effects have failed to appear in
false recall relative to their general robustness in true recall. More importantly, these arguments founder because
when these effects do emerge, they are consistent with
AAT's prediction that categorized lists and theme-relevant labels can and do affect false recall rates, but only
when they contribute to the overall associative-activation of the critical lure.
Of course, it is prudent to test assumptions using a
variety of operationalizations of key constructs. Indeed,
any one manipulation by itself has potential limitations
and, testing gist-based versus associative-activation
explanations by only manipulating explicit variables such
as list content and cuing has its own set of concerns (e.g.,
differential sensitivities of measuring recollection with recall versus recognition, presenting cues only at encoding

versus at encoding and retrieval), ones that may limit
the degree to which findings can be generalized. To correct this situation, we conducted a third experiment,
one that examined a different, more implicit test of gist
versus associative-activation.

Experiment 3
In Experiments 1 and 2 it has been established that
children's false memories are dependent on associativeactivation processes indexed by BAS and that this is independent of gist manipulations. In Experiment 3, we take a
different tactic and examine what might be considered a
more implicit operationalization of gist-across-the-list,
one that has to do with the semantic coherence of the
studied material, namely, semantic density (SD). SD is
an index of associations among list items themselves
rather than between the list items and the critical lure.
Specifically, if the thematic cohesion of a list is related
to a child's ability to access the list's gist, then lists whose
cohesion index (semantic density) is high should evince
higher levels of false recollection (particularly recall measures as they clearly involve gist recollective processes;
see Brainerd & Reyna, 2005) than lists whose cohesion index is low (also see discussion in Gallo, 2006). Indeed,
according to FTT, there should be an interaction between
age and semantic cohesion/density such that semantic
density effects should be larger with younger than older
children given younger children's poorer spontaneous gist
extraction abilities. Because adults' ability to extract gist
regardless of cohesion is not contested in the literature,
in Experiment 3 we concern ourselves solely with
children.
Before turning to the experiment itself, it is worth
noting that we are not aware of any existing research
that has varied semantic cohesion/density with children.
As close as we could find were studies in which thematic
blocking of list materials was manipulated in DRM studies with adults (e.g., McDermott, 1996), resulting in increases in both true and false recall rates; blocking
manipulations that have been used to examine children's
true recall of categorized materials (e.g., see Lange,
1978), resulting in increases in correct recall (false recall
was not examined); and several studies manipulating
semantic density with adults that examined the role of
episodic context in true recall (e.g., McEvoy et al.,
1999; Nelson, Goodmon, & Akirmak, 2007; Nelson &
Zhang, 2000). For example, McEvoy et al. (1999) found
that when BAS was held constant, high levels of semantic density (as measured by the number of interitem
connections) elevated true recall and low levels of
semantic density decreased true recall. The reverse was
found for false recall: low levels increased false recall
whereas high levels of semantic density decreased false
recall. It has been suggested that because high levels of
semantic density increased true recall, false memories
are less likely to occur. Furthermore, exactly the opposite
pattern was found for false recognition. That is, high levels of semantic density increased false recognition. McEvoy et al. (1999) suggest that the high level of semantic

M.L. Howe et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 60 (2009) 229-251

density increased the familiarity of the critical lure on
the recognition test and therefore false recognition. The
latter finding could also be explained by FTT. However,
because of the lower amount of false recollection that
occurred for the same lures in the recall paradigm in
the low-level semantic density condition, it seems unlikely that a pure gist-based explanation would suffice.
Overall, the studies to date support the conclusion that
both BAS and semantic density are more consistent with
models emphasizing associative-activation.
In this experiment, we manipulated semantic cohesion/density by varying the degree to which items on
the list were associated with one another. Items on
DRM and category lists not only vary in the number of
connections among items within the list (the metric used
by McEvoy et al., 1999) but also in the degree to which
they are interconnected (a metric akin to BAS). That is,
in addition to measuring the degree to which items on
a list give rise to a critical lure (as measured by BAS),
one can measure the degree to which the list items themselves are linked to one another (semantic density or SD).
Indeed, categorized lists that are semantically denser give
rise to higher rates of true recall than lists whose members are not as highly interconnected (e.g., see Talmi &
Moscovitch, 2004).
In Experiment 3, we operationalized SD using Nelson
et al.'s (1999) norms for associative connectivity. Essentially, SD is a composite measure of the degree to which
items within a list activate each other (both FAS and BAS
between list items). Both SD and BAS are based on
associative strength but the difference is that the latter
is based on direct association between list items (e.g.,
bed) and the critical lure (e.g., SLEEP) whereas the former
is based on associations within a list and these can be
forward and backward (e.g., bed to rest and rest to bed).
Because both BAS and SD are based on the same
associative strength metric, direct comparisons can be
made between the individual components' contributions
to true and false recall. Research has shown that the
higher a list's SD, the better recall is for materials on that
list, partly because a remembered item is more likely to
cue other, related items on a list (see McEvoy et al.,
1999; Nelson et al., 2007; Talmi & Moscovitch, 2004).
Under conditions such as these, most, if not all, memory
models (including AAT and FTT) accurately predict that
true recall should increase as SD increases. Theories differ, however, in whether SD should also affect false recall. Theories such as FTT predict that to the extent
that higher levels of SD are correlated with a greater
likelihood of extracting list gist, false recall rates should
also increase (and as noted earlier, this may interact
with
age).
However,
for
theories
based
on
associative-activation (AAT), variation in SD, while affecting true recall, should have smaller or null effects on
false recall, depending on how much SD contributes to
item-specific distinctiveness (McEvoy et al., 1999). Moreover, according to AAT, the critical variable determining
false recall of critical lures is BAS, not across-the-list
connectivity.
In Experiment 3, then, we varied both BAS as well as
SD. For half of the lists, BAS was higher than SD (higher

243

BAS) and for the other half of the lists, SD was higher
than BAS (higher SD)3. Both FTT and AAT predict that true
recall rates should be higher for lists high on SD (i.e., true
recall should be higher for higher SD lists than higher
BAS lists). However, the theories differ for false recollection. According to the FTT, lists higher in SD should also exhibit greater false recall than those lower in SD [i.e., (higher
SD) > (higher BAS)] and these effects should be stronger for
younger than older children. According to AAT, because SD
is not related to false recall but BAS is, SD should have no
effect but lists higher in BAS should produce higher levels
of false recall than those with lower levels of BAS [i.e.,
(higher BAS) > (higher SD)].
Method
Participants
A new sample of 77 children participated (50% male) in
this experiment. There were 25 5-year-olds (M = 5.3, SD = 4
months), 25 7-year-olds (M = 7.4, SD = 4 months), and 27
11-year-olds (M = 11.3, SD = 4 months). The children were
White, came from middle-class homes, and were tested
following parental consent and their own assent on the
testing day.

3
Research has shown that recall probabilities can be well described by
the strength of interitem connections in networks that include connections
between, for example, cues (items) and targets (lures) and the organization
between the cues (items) themselves. Nelson and Zhang (2000) demonstrated that it is possible to calculate an activation strength index that
integrates these different forms of associations (e.g., the association
between items and the critical target or the association between items
themselves). Most importantly, this activation strength index can be used
to predict recall. According to Nelson and Zhang (2000) this activation
strength index (AS) can be seen as a parallel activation process involving all
connections in an associative network. These connections contribute
additively to strengthening the target word (in our case the critical lure)
and its associates. In other words, AS includes the degree to which items are
connected to a target (lure) plus the degree to which items are connected
between themselves (AS = BAS + SD). For example, the activation of GREEN
is determined by the degree to which the related concepts yellow, blue are
associated with GREEN (backward associative strength) plus by the degree
to which yellow and blue are associated. The degree to which list items are
associated with each other gives an indication of how semantically dense a
list is. In particular, the stronger items are associated with each other the
denser is a list. In this context, the activation strength (AS) of a word or
critical lure may not only be determined by the amount of backward
associative strength (BAS) but also by the semantic density (SD) of the list
items. Because AS may be an index of recall probabilities, it was necessary
to hold AS constant across lists to obtain independent estimates of the roles
of BAS and SD in children's true and false recall. That is, High BAS/High SD
and Low BAS/Low SD conditions were not included because they confound
overall activation strength with the manipulation of interest. Because our
interest was focused squarely on the relative roles of SD and BAS, not
overall AS, the only relevant test conditions were High BAS/Low SD and Low
BAS/High SD, the only two conditions that can be equated for overall AS. In
a full, 2 x 2 factorial design we would confound activation strength (e.g., it
would be highest in the High BAS/High SD condition, moderate in the High
BAS/Low SD and Low BAS/High SD conditions, and lowest in the Low BAS/
Low SD condition) and it would not be possible to draw any conclusions
from the individual components' contributions to
true/false recall
independent ofoverall activation strength. With AS held constant, we were
able to assess how lists that were more dominant in SD than in BASor more
dominant in BAS than SD affected true and false recall, independent of
variation in AS.

244

M.L. Howe et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 60 (2009) 229-251

Design, materials, and procedure
A 2(List condition: higher SD vs. higher BAS)  3(Age: 5vs. 7- vs. 11-year-olds) design was used where list condition was manipulated within subject and age was a between-subjects variable. Each child received 6, 11-item
word lists (see Appendix C). The norms for BAS and SD
were obtained from the n  n matrix in Nelson et al.
(1999). As before, BAS values represent the associations
between each list item (e.g., yellow) and the critical lure
(e.g., GREEN). SD values represent associations between
the list items within a list and were calculated following
Nelson and Zhang (2000). For example, in the GREEN list
the item yellow produces the list item blue with a probability of .07, the list item blue produces the list item red with a
probability of .11, red produces yellow with a probability of
.02, and so forth. SD comprises the sum of all interitem
associations. Out of the 6 word lists, 3 lists were lower in
BAS than in SD (SD > BAS: Mean difference = 1.48) and 3
lists were higher in BAS than in SD (BAS > SD: Mean difference = 1.47). There were no significant differences in the
mean differences between these list conditions. Moreover,
activation strength (see Footnote 3) did not differ across
list conditions (t(4) = 1.40, p = .24). Similarly, there were
no significant differences in mean word frequency for list
items, t(4) = .42, p = .70, or in word frequencies of the critical lures between the two list conditions, t(4) = .71,
p = .52 (word frequencies were taken from Stuart et al.
(1993-1996)).
Participants were tested individually in a quiet room.
Prior to presentation of the first list, children were given
standard memory instructions indicating that they would
be presented with lists of words and that they should try
to remember as many as possible. Following these instructions, participants were presented the first list, administered a 30-second distractor task (circling randomized
pairs of letters), and then asked to recall as many words
as possible from the list. This study-distractor-test cycle
was continued until all six lists had been presented. Items
were presented in the usual descending order of BAS. Items
were audio recorded and presented to the children at a 3second rate and list order was counterbalanced across
children.
Results and discussion
Preliminary analyses showed that gender was not a significant source of variation and was eliminated from subsequent analyses. Like Experiments 1 and 2, true recall
findings are presented first followed by false recall.
True recall
The proportion of correct responses was analyzed using
a 2(List condition: higher SD vs. higher BAS)  3(Age: 5-,
7-, and 11-year-olds) ANOVA. There was a main effect for
age, F(2, 74) = 111.39, p < .001, g2 = .75. Post-hoc Bonferroni comparisons (all ps < .001) showed that 11-year-olds
(M = .54) correctly recalled more than 7-year-olds
(M = .33) who correctly recalled more than 5-year-olds
(M = .20). There was also a main effect for list condition,
F(1, 74) = 58.11, p < .001, g2 = .44, where more items were
correctly recalled when semantic density was high (higher

Table 7
Mean proportion of true and false recall as a function of age and list in
Experiment 3 (standard errors in parentheses).
Age

5-year-olds
7-year-olds
11-year-olds

True recall

False recall

Higher SD

Higher BAS

Higher SD

Higher BAS

.24 (.022)
.37 (.022)
.60 (.021)

.16 (.018)
.28 (.018)
.49 (.017)

.03 (.028)
.07 (.028)
.10 (.027)

.05 (.038)
.20 (.038)
.17 (.037)

SD; M = .40) than when it was low (higher BAS; M = .31). As
can be seen in the left panel of Table 7, the Age  List condition interaction was not significant (i.e., semantic density
effects were similar at each age).
False recall
The proportion of critical lures falsely recalled was analyzed using a 2(List condition: higher SD vs. higher
BAS)  3(Age: 5-, 7-, and 11-year-olds) ANOVA. There
was a main effect for age, F(2, 74) = 5.50, p < .01, g2 = .13.
Post-hoc Bonferroni comparisons (ps < .02) showed that
5-year-olds (M = .04) falsely recalled fewer critical lures
than 7-year-olds (M = .13) and than 11-year-olds
(M = .14) and the latter two age groups did not differ. There
was also a main effect for list condition, F(1, 74) = 8.10,
p < .02, g2 = .10, where more critical lures were falsely recalled when BAS was high (higher BAS; M = .14) than when
it was low (higher SD; M = .06). As can be seen in the right
panel of Table 7, the Age  List condition interaction was
not significant (i.e., BAS effects were similar at each age).
Overall, then, consistent with predictions of most theories (including AAT and FTT), semantic density (a measure
of within-list cohesion) increased true recall rates for all
children regardless of age. Like children's categorized recall, higher levels of intralist similarity produced higher
rates of true recall. However, as predicted by AAT, these
semantic density effects did not translate into higher rates
of false recall. As seen in previous studies with children
(e.g., Howe et al., 2004, 2008, in press), what controls false
memory rates is BAS--when BAS is high, false recall of critical lures is high; when BAS is low, false recall of critical
lures is low. Similar effects were obtained here--when
BAS was high, false recall of critical lures was high; when
BAS was low, false recall of critical lures was low. Thus, like
the findings when across-the-list gist was explicitly cued
(Experiments 1 and 2), when across-the-list gist was
manipulated implicitly (as measured by SD), true recall is
the beneficiary, consistent with most theories of memory
and memory development. However, these effects do not
translate into changes in false recall rates. Rather, false recall rates in all three experiments reported here are controlled by BAS, consistent with AAT.
General discussion and conclusions
That both true and false recall increased with age is
consistent with previous developmental research and both
FTT and AAT. However, across experiments, the pattern of
findings was more consistent with AAT's predictions of
developmental patterns in false memory illusions than
FTT's. Moreover, the results provided clear evidence of

M.L. Howe et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 60 (2009) 229-251

developmental continuity in the emergence of false memory illusions, consistent with what is known about the
development of accurate remembering. In the remainder
of this article, we discuss both of these trends, separately.
Associative-activation and fuzzy-trace theories of false
memory development
The results of these experiments are more consistent
with AAT (see Howe, 2005, 2006, 2008a, 2008b; Howe
et al., 2008, in press) than with FTT (e.g., Brainerd & Reyna, 2005; Brainerd et al., 2008). Specifically, regardless of
age, false recall rates were contingent solely on variation
in associative strength and not on manipulations related
to gist-across-the-list. Indeed, regardless of age, more
false recall was evidenced when lists were high in associative strength, particularly BAS (Experiments 1, 2, and
3). Although FAS (Experiment 1) did play a role in false
recall rates (as shown previously by Brainerd & Wright,
2005, with adults using recognition measures), particularly when explicit category primes were given prior to
list presentation in the first experiment, overall list
strength was the single best predictor of false recall
rates. Neither the use of categorized lists nor the provision of explicit cues that primed the lists' gist increased
false memory rates (Experiments 1 and 2) except, as
noted, when those primes were highly associated with
the critical lure and not because they primed gistacross-the-list. Moreover, when the degree of semantic
cohesion among list constituents was increased, true recall was enhanced but false recall levels did not change
(Experiment 3).
That associative-activation, especially as indexed by
BAS, plays a major role in false memory production is not
new in the adult literature (e.g., Gallo, 2006). With these
experiments as well as other recent research with children
(Howe, 2005, 2006, 2008a; Howe et al., 2008, in press), it is
becoming equally apparent in the developmental literature
that associative-activation is the key variable driving children's false memories too. Moreover, it is also becoming
clear that some of the best-fitting models for adult false
memory production are ones based on associative-activation (e.g., Gallo, 2006; Hutchison & Balota, 2005; Kimball
et al., 2007). What these experiments and other recent
findings in the developmental literature suggest is that
associative-activation theory may also provide an appropriate model for the development of false memories (e.g.,
Howe, 2005; Howe et al., 2008; Metzger et al., 2008). In
the rest of this section, we focus on the findings relevant
to this claim.
First, consider the manipulation of categorical versus
associative lists across Experiments 1 and 2. FTT predicted that the additional vertical, or gist-across-the-list,
connections available across categorized lists should enhance false recollection rates, particularly in younger
children than adults. In addition, category lists should
exceed DRM lists in false recall rates particularly for
young children because they contain fewer potential
gists (the category itself) than DRM lists that can contain
multiple gists. By contrast, AAT predicted that associative-activation (BAS) is the critical determinant for false

245

memories independent of list type (categorical vs. associative). In particular, these additional relations in categorical lists, while enhancing true recall, should not
have an impact on false recall unless they too contributed to the overall associative-activation of the critical
lure. Like prior research (Howe, 2006; Howe et al., in
press), it is this latter outcome that was obtained in the
first two experiments in this article. Specifically, considering only those comparisons between category and DRM
lists without the addition of explicit gist-priming cues,
false recall rates were no greater for category lists than
DRM lists. Rather, across Experiments 1 and 2, false recall
rates were determined by overall associative-activation
(BAS and FAS).
Second, consider the effects of explicit priming (cuing)
using theme-relevant labels. FTT predicted that such cues
should increase false memory rates because they prime
across-the-list gist (e.g., Holliday et al., 2008) and that
these effects should be larger in younger children than
older children and adults because it is the younger children who are particularly deficient in spontaneous gist
processing. By contrast, AAT makes the same prediction
here as it did with the category-structure manipulation,
namely, that false recall rates should not be altered by
explicit cues unless they alter the overall associativeactivation of the critical lure. Again, the results of the
first two experiments in this article are consistent with
AAT. In Experiment 1, false recall for categorized lists
was higher when explicit cues were presented, but the
same was not true for DRM lists. As it turned out, this
increase was an artifact of increased associative-activation not priming of gist-across-the-list. That is, increased
false recall was a consequence of the category labels
being more highly associated with the critical lure (the
category prototype) on the category lists than the labels
used for the DRM lists. When these associative-activation
differences between the cues were eliminated in Experiment 2, there were no effects due to explicitly cuing the
gist for category or DRM lists.
When a more implicit measure of gist-across-the-list
was employed in Experiment 3 (semantic cohesion or density), and it was contrasted with variation in BAS, we once
again obtained findings that were more consistent with
AAT than FTT. That is, increases in interitem cohesion were
associated with increases in true recall but not false recall.
The only variable (besides age) that influenced children's
rates of false recall was changes in associative-activation
levels (as indexed by BAS).
Taken together, the predictions of FTT (more false recall
for children when gist relations were present [category
lists], when gist was primed [cues], and when interitem
semantic cohesion was high [semantically dense lists])
were not confirmed in any of the three experiments in this
article. Instead, what was found across all of the experiments was that manipulations designed to increase the
probability of gist extraction led to increases in true recollection but had no effect on false recollection. Indeed,
across all three experiments and regardless of which gistenhancing manipulation was examined, associative-activation was the single best determinant of false memory rates
regardless of age.

246

M.L. Howe et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 60 (2009) 229-251

Overall, then, because true and false recall, but especially false recollection in children and adults, depended
on the strength of associative relations, these findings
are consistent with more general associative-activation
models of memory illusions using the DRM paradigm
(e.g., Gallo, 2006; Kimball et al., 2007). Indeed, this conclusion fits well with other recent findings concerning
children's susceptibility to the DRM illusion (e.g., Howe,
2005, 2006, 2008a, 2008b; Howe et al., 2008, in press).
More important, it is consistent with speculation on the
mechanisms underlying adults' DRM illusions (Gallo,
2006; Hutchison & Balota, 2005; Roediger et al., 2001b).
For example, Roediger et al. (2001b) found for adults that
BAS was the critical factor predicting false memories
when examining other variables (e.g., word length, word
frequency, concreteness, FAS, connectivity, and true recall). This is exactly the pattern that has been obtained
across the three experiments here. When controlling for
FAS (Experiment 1), word frequency (Experiments 1, 2,
and 3), and connectivity (SD) (Experiment 3), BAS was
the key factor driving false memories, regardless of age.
Most importantly, the role of BAS in the false memory
illusion was prevalent despite using different methods
and experimental manipulations. Again, although BAS
may serve as a proxy variable for a host of different type
of relationships (phonological, orthographic, temporal
contiguity, spatial proximity, superordinate relations,
property relations, physical or conceptual similarity,
etc.), and it may be difficult to isolate associative-activation from semantic overlap (Brainerd et al., in press;
Hutchison, 2003; Roediger et al., 2001b), it is still the single best predictor of children's and adults' false memory
illusions. We now consider this developmental continuity
in more detail.

Developmental continuity in false memory illusions
One of the novel findings to emerge from these experiments is that age-related increases in true and false recall
were observed regardless of the list's associative strength.
That is, both strong and weak lists showed similar developmental trends. Moreover, both BAS (Experiments 1, 2, and
3) and FAS (Experiment 1) played a key role in children's
and adults' false memory rates. Although BAS was clearly
the main determinant of false memory rates for children
and adults, FAS also contributed. This is consistent with
Brainerd and Wright's (2005) findings for adults using considerably shorter lists and a recognition procedure. The novel contribution of this research is that the results extend
this trend to measures of recall and, more importantly, to
children's false memory development. In doing so, these
findings add to the growing literature on memory continuity effects across age (Howe, 2000; Howe et al., 2008, in
press).
In fact, these findings add to a growing list of memory
phenomena that exhibit strong developmental invariance.
Evidence has been accumulating for some time that many
of the variables that govern encoding, consolidation, storage, retention, and retrieval processes in young children
(and even infants) are the same as those that regulate

these memory processes in older children and adults
(for reviews, see Bauer, 2004; Howe, 2000). Of course,
these continuities notwithstanding, there do exist significant developmental advances in memory processes across
childhood and into adulthood (e.g., faster and more efficient encoding, storage, and retrieval; increased retention
of information over longer intervals) that are contingent
on advances in related cognitive domains (e.g., knowledge
base, attentional resources, strategies) (for reviews, see
Bauer, 2005; Howe, 2000). What these experiments add
to this ever-expanding list is that the development of
both veridical and false memory can be viewed as developmentally invariant phenomena and that the development of false memory in childhood can be subsumed
under the same model as that used to account for false
recollection in adulthood. That is, these age-invariant effects suggest that a single theory should be able to account for false memory and its development, one that
relies on associative-activation processes.
The model supported by these experiments, as well as
a number of prior studies (Howe, 2005, 2006, 2008a;
Howe et al., 2008, in press), is AAT. Here, developmental
changes in veridical recall and false memory illusions are
driven by increases in the number and strength of associative relations in children's knowledge base (Bjorklund,
1987, 2004) as well as the speed and automaticity with
which these associative relations are activated (Bjorklund
& Jacobs, 1985; Howe, 2005; Metzger et al., 2008). These
changes in number, strength, speed, and automaticity of
associations and their activation are linked to other
well-known changes in children's knowledge base, resources, and speed of processing in related cognitive domains (for reviews, see Bjorklund, 2004; Courage &
Howe, 2002; Dempster & Brainerd, 1995). Together, these
developmental changes lead to increased activation of
studied and nonstudied but related information in memory, which in turn increases both true and false recall
rates across childhood and into adulthood. Because the
associative-activation theory provides a necessary and
sufficient account of true and false memory data from
both children and adults, and because the developmental
mechanisms identified in this theory are well-known
across a variety of other, developmentally continuous
phenomena in memory and cognition, it may be more
parsimonious to adopt this theory of false memory development than to alter other extant models.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a grant from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada and by a grant from the Economic and Social
Research Council of the United Kingdom (RES-062-230452) to Mark L. Howe. The authors thank Charles J. Brainerd, Keith Hutchison, Jim Neely, and an anonymous reviewer for comments on a previous draft of this article.
Portions of this research were presented at the 2007
biennial meeting of the Society for Research in Child
Development.

247

M.L. Howe et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 60 (2009) 229-251
Critical Lure: Doctor
Label: Medical things
MBAS: .245 MFAS: .053

Appendix A
DRM and category lists used in Experiment 1
1. DRM word lists and labels
(i) High BAS--Low FAS
Critical Lure: Smell
Label: Something to do with your senses
MBAS: .290 MFAS: .015
ITEM

BAS

FAS

Nose
Breathe
Sniff
Aroma
Hear
See
Nostril
Whiff
Scent
Reek
Stench
Fragrance
Perfume
Salts

.108
.000
.442
.678
.000
.000
.000
.577
.625
.510
.562
.389
.393
.028

.116
.000
.043
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.029
.000
.000
.000
.036
.000

ITEM

BAS

FAS

Nurse
Sick
Lawyer
Medicine
Health
Hospital
Dentist
Physician
Ill
Patient
Office
Stethoscope
Surgeon
Clinic

.550
.030
.150
.150
.050
.030
.210
.800
.000
.370
.010
.520
.480
.300

.380
.050
.100
.070
.020
.010
.020
.040
.010
.030
.010
.000
.040
.000

(iii) Low BAS--High FAS
Critical Lure: Lamp
Label: Things that help you see
MBAS: .006 MFAS: .066

Critical Lure: Mountain
Label: Things to do with high places
MBAS: .163 MFAS: .037
ITEM

BAS

FAS

Hill
Valley
Climb
Summit
Top
Molehill
Peak
Plain
Glacier
Goat
Bike
Climber
Range
Steep

.428
.195
.291
.108
.000
.256
.248
.000
.020
.028
.033
.603
.000
.061

.265
.020
.092
.000
.041
.031
.020
.000
.000
.000
.000
.031
.051
.000

Critical Lure: Needle
Label: Something to do with spiky objects
MBAS: .203 MFAS: .063

Thread
Pin
Eye
Sewing
Sharp
Point
Prick
Thimble
Haystack
Thorn
Hurt
Injection
Syringe
Cloth

BAS
.760
.290
.000
.181
.030
.020
.110
.220
.420
.030
.000
.330
.520
.000

BAS

FAS

.020
.028
.014
.000
.000
.000
.034
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000

.769
.058
.045
.026
.000
.000
.019
.000
.000
.000
.000
.013
.000
.000

Critical Lure: Cabbage
Label: Something that you eat
MBAS: .012 MFAS: .051

(ii) High BAS--High FAS

ITEM

ITEM
Light
Shade
Bulb
Post
Black
Cord
Desk
Bright
Lighter
Read
On
Burn
Pole
Stand

FAS
.420
.210
.000
.240
.020
.020
.010
.000
.030
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000

ITEM

BAS

FAS

Head
Lettuce
Vegetable
Food
Salad
Green
Garden
Leaf
Sauerkraut
Slaw
Patch
Plant
Carrots
Soup

.000
.021
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.042
.041
.066
.000
.000
.000

.022
.281
.137
.022
.022
.079
.000
.029
.000
.043
.115
.000
.000
.014

248

M.L. Howe et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 60 (2009) 229-251
Critical Lure: Chair
Label: Pieces of Furniture
MBAS: .169 MFAS: .037

2. Category word lists and labels
(i) High BAS--Low FAS
Critical Lure: Apple
Label: Fruit
MBAS: .051 MFAS: .018

ITEM

BAS

FAS

Orange
Banana
Grape
Pear
Peach
Strawberry
Kiwi
Pineapple
Watermelon
Tomato
Plum
Grapefruit
Mango
Cherry

.080
.150
.030
.250
.060
.000
.000
.000
.000
.010
.050
.010
.000
.080

.170
.020
.000
.050
.030
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000

ITEM

BAS

FAS

Table
Couch
Bed
Desk
Sofa
Dresser
Loveseat
Nightstand
Ottoman
Recliner
Stool
Futon
Bookshelf
Cabinet

.760
.290
.000
.290
.130
.000
.000
.000
.000
.550
.320
.000
.000
.020

.310
.110
.010
.020
.080
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.030
.000
.000
.000

(iii) Low BAS--High FAS
Critical Lure: Hammer
Label: Carpenter's tools
MBAS: .089 MFAS: .056

Critical Lure: Car
Label: Transportation vehicle
MBAS: .117 MFAS: .020

ITEM

BAS

FAS

Bus
Truck
Airplane
Train
Bicycle
Van
Boat
Motorcycle
Skateboard
Subway
Taxi
Scooter
Jeep
Helicopter

.250
.260
.030
.060
.040
.450
.000
.090
.000
.030
.130
.000
.300
.000

.020
.110
.010
.010
.080
.000
.060
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.010
.000

ITEM

BAS

FAS

Nail
Saw
Screwdriver
Drill
Wrench
Screw(s)
Level
Ruler
Tape Measure
Wood
Sander
Knife
Chisel
Pencil

.620
.100
.080
.000
.090
.030
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.410
.000

.800
.030
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.050
.000

(ii) High BAS--High FAS
Critical Lure: Fly
Label: Insect
MBAS: .047 MFAS: .021

Critical Lure: Instrument
Label: Musical things
MBAS: .125 MFAS: .039

ITEM

BAS

FAS

ITEM

BAS

FAS

Drums
Guitar
Flute
Piano
Trumpet
Clarinet
Saxophone
Violin
Trombone
Tuba
Cello
Oboe
Bass
Harp

.010
.050
.180
.040
.180
.120
.240
.060
.170
.250
.150
.180
.030
.080

.050
.150
.080
.160
.070
.030
.020
.020
.000
.010
.000
.000
.000
.000

Ant
Spider
Bee
Mosquito
Beetle
Ladybug
Grasshopper
Butterfly
Wasp
Roach
Moth
Gnat
Cockroach
Caterpillar

.000
.190
.010
.050
.000
.000
.010
.000
.020
.000
.110
.230
.000
.030

.000
.020
.010
.040
.000
.000
.000
.010
.000
.010
.000
.000
.000
.000

249

M.L. Howe et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 60 (2009) 229-251

Appendix B
DRM and category lists used in Experiment 2
DRM lists and their backward associative strength
Items
removed

List and label

CBAS RBAS

None
Strong
Weak

MAN: Things to do with people
Woman, husband, uncle, lady, mouse, male, father, strong, friend, beard, person, handsome, muscle, suit, old
Husband, uncle, lady, mouse, male, father, strong, friend, beard, person, handsome, muscle, suit, old
Woman, husband, uncle, mouse, strong, friend, person, handsome, muscle, suit, old

1.72
1.12
1.12

N/A
.60
.60(.37,.13,.05,.05)

None
Strong
Weak

COLD: Things to do with temperature
Hot, snow, warm, winter, ice, wet, frigid, chilly, heat, weather, freeze, air, shiver, arctic, frost
Snow, warm, winter, ice, wet, frigid, chilly, heat, weather, freeze, air, shiver, arctic, frost
Hot, snow, warm, winter, ice, chilly, heat, weather, freeze, air, shiver, arctic, frost

5.30
4.62
4.62

N/A
.68
.68 (.11,.57)

Strong
Weak

DOCTOR: Medical things
Nurse, sick, lawyer, medicine, health, hospital, dentist, physician, ill, patient, office, stethoscope, surgeon, clinic, 3.68
cure
Nurse, sick, lawyer, medicine, health, hospital, dentist, ill, patient, office, stethoscope, surgeon, clinic, cure
2.88
Nurse, sick, lawyer, medicine, physician, ill, patient, office, surgeon, clinic, cure
2.88

None
Strong
Weak

SHIRT: Things you wear
Blouse, sleeves, pants, tie, button, shorts, iron, polo, collar, vest, pocket, jersey, belt, linen, cuffs
Sleeves, pants, tie, button, shorts, iron, polo, collar, vest, pocket, jersey, belt, linen, cuffs
Blouse, sleeves, pants, button, shorts, iron, vest, jersey, belt, linen, cuffs

2.89
2.24
2.24

N/A
.65
.65(.34,.18,.07,.06)

None
Strong
Weak

SLEEP: Things you do lying down
Bed, rest, awake, tired, dream, wake, snooze, blanket, doze, slumber, snore, nap, peace, yawn, dozy
Bed, rest, awake, tired, dream, wake, snooze, blanket, doze, slumber, snore, peace, yawn, dozy
Bed, rest, awake, tired, dream, snooze, doze, slumber, nap, peace, yawn, dozy

6.47
5.74
5.74

N/A
.73
.73(.02,.44,.28)

None
Strong
Weak

LION: Animal things
Tiger, circus, jungle, tamer, den, cub, Africa, mane, cage, feline, roar, fierce, bears, hunt, pride
Tiger, circus, jungle, tamer, den, cub, Africa, mane, cage, feline, fierce, bears, hunt, pride
Circus, jungle, tamer, den, cub, Africa, cage, feline, roar, bears, hunt, pride

2.02
1.41
1.41

N/A
.61
.61(.11,.20,.31)

None

N/A
.80
.80(.05,.52,.03,.21)

Category lists and their backward associative strength
Items

Removed list and label

CBAS

RBAS

None
Strong
Weak

ROBIN: Birds
Eagle, bluejay, cardinal, hawk, crow, hummingbird, parrot, sparrow, pigeon, seagull, dove, duck, falcon, canary, owl
Eagle, bluejay, cardinal, hawk, crow, hummingbird, parrot, pigeon, seagull, dove, duck, falcon, canary, owl
Eagle, bluejay, hawk, crow, hummingbird, parrot, sparrow, pigeon, seagull, dove, falcon, canary

7.27
6.52
6.52

N/A
.75
.75(.47,.10,.18)

Weak

APPLE: Fruits
Orange, banana, grape, pear, peach, strawberry, kiwi, pineapple, watermelon, tomato, plum, grapefruit, mango,
cherry, lemon
Orange, banana, grape, peach, strawberry, kiwi, pineapple, watermelon, tomato, plum, grapefruit, mango, cherry,
lemon
Orange, pear, peach, strawberry, kiwi, pineapple, watermelon, grapefruit, mango, cherry, lemon

None
Strong
Weak

INSTRUMENT: Musical things
Drums, guitar, flute, piano, trumpet, clarinet, saxophone, violin, trombone, tuba, bass guitar, cello, oboe, bass, viola
Drums, guitar, flute, piano, trumpet, clarinet, saxophone, violin, trombone, bass guitar, cello, oboe, bass, viola
Drums, guitar, flute, trumpet, clarinet, saxophone, violin, trombone, tuba, bass guitar, cello, viola

None
Strong

.73

N/A

.48

.25

.49

.24(.15,.05,.03,.01)

1.79
1.54
1.54

N/A
.25
.25(.04,.03,.18)

Strong
Weak

FLY: Insects
Ant, spider, bee, mosquito, beetle, ladybug, grasshopper, butterfly, wasp, roach, moth, gnat, cockroach, caterpillar,
bug
Ant, spider, bee, mosquito, beetle, ladybug, grasshopper, butterfly, wasp, roach, moth, cockroach, caterpillar, bug
Ant, mosquito, beetle, ladybug, butterfly, roach, moth, gnat, cockroach, caterpillar, bug

None
Strong
Weak

HAMMER: Carpenter's tools
Nail, saw, screwdriver, drill, wrench, screw, level, ruler, tape measure, wood, sander, knife, chisel, pencil, sandpaper
Saw, screwdriver, drill, wrench, screw, level, ruler, tape measure, wood, sander, knife, chisel, pencil, sandpaper
Nail, drill, wrench, level, ruler, tape measure, wood, sander, knife, pencil, sandpaper

1.33
.71
.71

N/A
.62
.62(.41,.10,.08,.03)

None
Strong
Weak

CAR: Transportation vehicles
Bus, truck, airplane, train, bicycle, van, boat, motorcycle, Ford, skateboard, subway, taxi, scooter, helicopter, jeep
Bus, truck, airplane, train, bicycle, boat, motorcycle, Ford, skateboard, subway, taxi, scooter, helicopter, jeep
Bus, truck, airplane, train, bicycle, van, boat, skateboard, subway, taxi, scooter, helicopter, jeep

2.00
1.55
1.55

N/A
.45
.45(.36,.09)

None

.71

N/A

.48
.48

.23
.23(.19,.01,.02,.01)

Note: CBAS: cumulative backward associative strength; RBAS: removed backward associative strength; italicized items were removed in strong lists; bolded
items were removed in weak lists.

250

M.L. Howe et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 60 (2009) 229-251

Appendix C
Semantic density dominant lists
Critical lure: green

Critical lure: crime

Critical lure:
number

Grass
Yellow
Bean
Blue
Vegetables
Nature
Tree
Colour
Leaf
Apple
Red

Punishment
Criminal
Murder
Robbery
Steal
Prison
Justice
Jail
Bad
Thief
Burglar

Math
Nine
Ten
Three
Two
One
Phone
Five
Eight
Address
Letter

.36
.18
.15
.14
.10
.05
.05
.04
.04
.03
.02

BAS = 2.16; SD = 3.17
3.52.

.17
.08
.05
.04
.04
.02
.02
.02
.01
.01
.01

BAS = 1.47; SD = 3.20

.18
.14
.12
.10
.07
.05
.05
.05
.03
.02
.02

BAS = 1.83; SD =

Backward associative strength dominant lists
Critical lure: soft
Hard
Pillow
Gentle
Smooth
Cotton
Skin
Silk
Touch
Feather
Warm
Comfortable

.56
.24
.20
.18
.17
.16
.09
.06
.05
.05
.02

Critical lure: hair

Critical lure:
work

Brush
Lice
Comb
Shampoo
Dryer
Head
Blonde
Style
Brown
Cut
Hat

Labor
Job
Earn
School
Office
Sweat
Play
Money
Fun
Hard
Lazy

.44
.37
.31
.29
.20
.19
.16
.11
.06
.06
.06

.69
.57
.20
.13
.13
.11
.07
.03
.02
.01
.01

BAS = 2.78; SD = 1.15
BAS = 3.25; SD = 1.91
BAS = 2.97; SD =
1.53.
Note: BAS = backward associative strength; SD = semantic density; the
number associated with each word is that word's backward associative
strength to the critical lure. Activation strength (AS) = BAS + SD.

References
Anderson, J. R. (1983). A spreading activation theory of memory. Journal of
Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 22, 261-295.
Anderson, J. R., & Bower, G. H. (1973). Human associative memory. Oxford,
UK: Winston.
Bauer, P. J. (2004). Getting explicit memory off the ground: Steps toward
construction of a neuro-developmental account of changes in the first
two years of life. Developmental Review, 24, 347-373.
Bauer, P. J. (2005). Developments in declarative memory: Decreasing
susceptibility to storage failure over the second year of life.
Psychological Science, 16, 41-47.
Bjorklund, D. F. (1987). How changes in knowledge base contribute to
the development of children's memory. Developmental Review, 7,
93-130.
Bjorklund, D. F. (2004). Children's thinking: Developmental and individual
differences (4th edition). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth/Thompson.
Bjorklund, D. F., & Jacobs, J. W. (1985). Associative and categorical
processes in children's memory: The role of automaticity in the
development of organization in free recall. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 39, 599-617.
Brainerd, C. J., Yang, C., Reyna, V. F., Howe, M. L., & Mills, B. A. (in press).
Semantic processing in ``associative" false memory. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review.
Brainerd, C. J., Forrest, T. J., Karibian, D., & Reyna, V. F. (2006).
Development of the false-memory illusion. Developmental
Psychology, 42, 962-979.

Brainerd, C. J., & Reyna, V. F. (2005). The science of false memory. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Brainerd, C. J., Reyna, V. F., & Ceci, S. J. (2008). Developmental reversals in
false memory: A review of theory and data. Psychological Bulletin, 134,
343-382.
Brainerd, C. J., Reyna, V. F., & Forrest, T. J. (2002). Are young children more
susceptible to the false-memory illusion? Child Development, 73,
1363-1377.
Brainerd, C. J., & Wright, R. (2005). Forward association, backward
association, and the false memory illusion. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 31, 554-567.
Chiarello, C. (1998). On codes of meaning and the meaning of codes:
Semantic access and retrieval within and between hemispheres. In M.
Beeman & C. Chiarello (Eds.), Right hemisphere language
communication:
Perspectives
from
cognitive
neuroscience
(pp. 141-160). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Collins, A. M., & Loftus, E. F. (1975). A spreading-activation theory of
semantic processing. Psychological Review, 82, 407-428.
Courage, M. L., & Howe, M. L. (2002). From infant to child: The dynamics
of cognitive change in the second year of life. Psychological Bulletin,
128, 250-277.
Deese, J. (1959). On the prediction of occurrence of certain verbal
intrusions in free recall. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 58,
17-22.
Dempster, F. N., & Brainerd, C. J. (Eds.). (1995). Interference and inhibition
in cognition. New York: Academic Press.
Dewhurst, S. A., Bould, E., Knott, L. M., & Thorley, C. (2009). The roles of
encoding and retrieval processes in associative and categorical
memory illusions. Journal of Memory and Language, 60, 154-164.
Frankel, M. T., & Rollins, H. A. (1985). Associative and categorical
hypotheses of organization in the free recall of adults and children.
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 40, 304-318.
Gallo, D. A. (2006). Associative illusions of memory: False memory research
in DRM and related tasks. New York: Psychology Press.
Gallo, D. A., & Roediger, H. L. III. (2002). Variability among word lists in
eliciting memory illusions: Evidence for associative activation and
monitoring. Journal of Memory and Language, 47, 469-497.
Hamilton, W. (1859). Lecture on metaphysics and logic. New York: Sheldon
and Company.
Hege, A. C. G., & Dodson, C. S. (2004). Why distinctive information reduces
false memories: Evidence for both impoverished relational-encoding
and distinctiveness heuristic accounts. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 30, 787-795.
Holliday, R. E., Reyna, V. F., & Brainerd, C. J. (2008). Recall of details never
experienced: Effects of age, repetition, and semantic cues. Cognitive
Development, 23, 67-78.
Howe, M. L. (2000). The fate of early memories: Developmental science and
the retention of childhood experiences. Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association.
Howe, M. L. (2005). Children (but not adults) can inhibit false memories.
Psychological Science, 16, 927-931.
Howe, M. L. (2006). Developmentally invariant dissociations in children's
true and false memories: Not all relatedness is created equal. Child
Development, 77, 1112-1123.
Howe, M. L. (2008a). Visual distinctiveness and the development of
children's false memories. Child Development, 79, 65-79.
Howe, M. L. (2008b). What is false memory development the
development of? Comment on Brainerd, Reyna, and Ceci (2008).
Psychological Bulletin, 134, 768-772.
Howe, M. L., Brainerd, C. J., & Kingma, J. (1985). Development of
organization in recall: A stages-of-learning analysis. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 39, 230-251.
Howe, M. L., Cichetti, D., Toth, S. L., & Cerrito, B. M. (2004). True and false
memories in maltreated children. Child Development, 75, 1402-1417.
Howe, M. L., Wimmer, M. C., & Blease, K. (in press). The role of associative
strength in children's false memory illusions. Memory.
Howe, M. L., Gagnon, N., & Thouas, L. (2008). Development of false
memories in bilingual children and adults. Journal of Memory and
Language, 58, 669-681.
Hutchison, K. A. (2003). Is semantic priming due to association strength or
feature overlap? A microanalytic review. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 10, 785-813.
Hutchison, K. A., & Balota, D. A. (2005). Decoupling semantic and
associative information in false memories: Explorations with
semantically ambiguous and unambiguous critical lures. Journal of
Memory and Language, 52, 1-28.
Kimball, D. R., & Bjork, R. A. (2002). Influences of intentional and
unintentional forgetting on false memories. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 131, 116-130.

M.L. Howe et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 60 (2009) 229-251
Kimball, D. R., Smith, T. A., & Kahana, M. J. (2007). The fSAM model of false
recall. Psychological Review, 114, 954-993.
Kiss, G., Armstrong, C., Milroy, R., & Piper, J. (1973). An associative
thesaurus of English and its computer analysis. Available from http://
www.eat.rl.ac.uk/.
Landauer, T. K., & Dumais, S. T. (1997). A solution to Plato's problem: The
latent semantic analysis theory of acquisition, induction, and the
representation of knowledge. Psychological Review, 104, 211-240.
Lange, G. W. (1978). Organization-related processes in children's recall. In
P. A. Ornstein (Ed.), Memory development in children (pp. 101-128).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
McDermott, K. B. (1996). The persistence of false memories in list recall.
Journal of Memory and Language, 35, 212-230.
McEvoy, C. L., Nelson, D. L., & Komatsu, T. (1999). What is the connection
between true and false memories? The differential roles of interitem
associations in recall and recognition. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 25, 1177-1194.
Metzger, R. L., Warren, A. R., Shelton, J. T., Price, J., Reed, A. W., & Williams,
D. (2008). Do children ``DRM" like adults? False memory production
in children. Developmental Psychology, 44, 169-181.
Nelson, D. L., McEvoy, C. L., & Schreiber, T. A. (1999). The University of
South Florida Word Association, Rhyme, and Word Fragment Norms.
Available from http://w3.usf.edu/FreeAssociation.
Nelson, D. L., Fisher, S. L., & Akirmak, U. (2007a). How implicitly activated
and explicitly acquired knowledge contribute to the effectiveness of
retrieval cues. Memory & Cognition, 35, 1892-1904.
Nelson, D. L., Goodmon, L. B., & Akirmak, U. (2007b). Implicitly activated
memories are associated to general context cues. Memory & Cognition,
35, 1878-1891.
Nelson, D. L., & Zhang, N. (2000). The ties that bind what is known to the
recall of what is new. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 7, 604-617.
Odegard, T. N., Holliday, R. E., Brainerd, C. J., & Reyna, V. F. (2008).
Attention to global gist processing eliminates age differences in false
memories. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 99, 96-113.
Park, L., Shobe, K. K., & Kihlstrom, J. F. (2005). Associative and categorical
relations in the associative memory illusion. Psychological Science, 16,
792-797.
Reyna, V. F., & Lloyd, F. (1997). Theories of false memory in children and
adults. Learning and individual differences, 9, 95-123.
Robinson, K. J., & Roediger, H. L. III, (1997). Associative processes in false
recall and false recognition. Psychological Science, 8, 231-237.

251

Roediger, H. L., III, Balota, D. A., & Watson, J. M. (2001a). Spreading
activation and the arousal of false memories. In H. L. Roediger, III, J. S.
Nairne, I. Neath, & A. M. Surprenant (Eds.), The nature of remembering:
Essays in honor of Robert G. Crowder (pp. 95-115). Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association.
Roediger, H. L., III, & McDermott, K. B. (1995). Creating false memories:
Remembering words not presented on lists. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 21, 803-814.
Roediger, H. L., III, Watson, J. M., McDermott, K. B., & Gallo, D. A. (2001b).
Factors that determine false recall: A multiple regression analysis.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 8, 385-407.
Schneider, W., & Pressley, M. P. (1997). Memory development between two
and twenty. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Seamon, J. G., Luo, C. R., Schlegel, S. E., Greene, S. E., & Goldenberg, A. B.
(2000). False memory for categorized pictures and words: The
category associates procedure for studying memory errors in
children and adults. Journal of Memory and Language, 42, 120-146.
Smith, S. M., Ward, T. B., Tindell, D. R., Sifonis, C. M., & Wilkenfeld, M. J.
(2000). Category structure and created memories. Memory &
Cognition, 28, 386-395.
Stuart, M., Masterson, J., Dixon, M., & Quilan, P. (1993-1996). Children's
printed word database. Available from http://www.essex.ac.uk/
psychology/cpwd/.
Sugrue, K., & Hayne, H. (2006). False memories produced by children and
adults in the DRM paradigm. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 20,
625-631.
Talmi, D., & Moscovitch, M. (2004). Can semantic relatedness explain the
enhancement of memory for emotional events? Memory & Cognition,
32, 742-751.
Tse, C.-S., & Neely, J. H. (2007). Semantic and repetition priming effects for
Deese/Roediger-McDermott (DRM) critical items and associates
produced by DRM and unrelated study lists. Memory & Cognition,
35, 1047-1066.
Underwood, B. J. (1965). False recognition produced by implicit verbal
responses. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 70, 122-129.
Van Overschelde, J. P., Rawson, K. A., & Dunlosky, J. (2004). Category
norms: An updated and expanded version of the Battig and Montague
(1969) norms. Journal of Memory and Language, 50, 289-335.
Wu, L. L., & Barsalou, L. W. (2007). Grounding concepts in perceptual
simulation: I. Evidence from feature generation, submitted for
publication.

