J. Child Lang. 37 (2010), 817-840. f Cambridge University Press 2009
doi:10.1017/S0305000909990055

How vocabulary size in two languages relates to
efficiency in spoken word recognition by young
Spanish-English bilinguals*
V I R G I N I A A. M A R C H M A N, A N N E F E R N A L D
AND NEREYDA HURTADO
Stanford University
(Received 25 November 2008 - Revised 10 April 2009 -
First published online 3 September 2009)
ABSTRACT

Research using online comprehension measures with monolingual
children shows that speed and accuracy of spoken word recognition are
correlated with lexical development. Here we examined speech
processing efficiency in relation to vocabulary development in bilingual
children learning both Spanish and English (n=26 ;2;6). Betweenlanguage associations were weak : vocabulary size in Spanish was
uncorrelated with vocabulary in English, and children's facility in
online comprehension in Spanish was unrelated to their facility in
English. Instead, efficiency of online processing in one language was
significantly related to vocabulary size in that language, after controlling
for processing speed and vocabulary size in the other language. These
links between efficiency of lexical access and vocabulary knowledge in
bilinguals parallel those previously reported for Spanish and English
monolinguals, suggesting that children's ability to abstract information
from the input in building a working lexicon relates fundamentally to
mechanisms underlying the construction of language.
The great majority of studies of early language learning have focused on
children growing up in monolingual environments who are learning a single
[*] We are grateful to the children and parents who participated in this research, and to the
staff of the Ravenswood Clinic, the East Palo Alto Library, East Palo Alto Head Start,
and Family Connections of San Mateo County. Special thanks to Theres Gruter,
Adriana Weisleder, Lucia Rodriguez Mata, Ana Luz Portillo, Amber MacMillan, Renate
Zangl, Nati Rodriguez, Guadalupe Makasyuk, Julissa Collado, Rebecca Wedel, Gladys
Ayora, Kimberly Rodriguez, Marcela Hernandez, Ana Maria Sanchez, Yessica
Hernandez, Sara Hernandez, Daisy Rios and the staff of the Center for Infant Studies at
Stanford University. This work was supported by grants from the National Institutes of
Health to Anne Fernald (HD 42235, DC 008838) with a Postdoctoral Research
Supplement for Underrepresented Minorities to Nereyda Hurtado. Address for correspondence : Virginia A. Marchman, Department of Psychology, Jordan Hall, Stanford
University, Stanford CA 94305. e-mail : marchman@stanford.edu

817

M A R C H M A N E T A L.

language. However, many of the world's children are exposed to two languages
from birth and begin to learn both over the first few years of life (McCardle
& Hoff, 2004). For example, as members of the largest and fastest growing
minority group in the US, many first-generation Latino children are regularly
exposed to both Spanish and English as infants and have the opportunity to
become proficient in both languages prior to entering school. When learning
two languages, do such emerging bilingual children follow developmental
trajectories that are similar to those of children learning just one ? Or do
bilingual and monolingual children differ in important aspects of language
development ? Such questions are increasingly of interest to researchers
exploring how young bilingual children begin to gain proficiency in two
languages and are informative for theories of language development more
generally (e.g. Werker & Byers-Heinlein, 2008).
In this study, we examine vocabulary development and real-time lexical
comprehension in children aged 2; 6 learning both Spanish and English at
the same time. Studies of online lexical comprehension with monolingual
Spanish and English learners show that over the second year toddlers get
faster at identifying the referents of familiar words presented in continuous
speech (Fernald, Pinto, Swingley, Weinberg & McRoberts, 1998 ; Hurtado,
Marchman & Fernald, 2007). Moreover, early efficiency in lexical processing
is associated not only with faster vocabulary growth but also with long-term
language and cognitive outcomes (Fernald, Perfors & Marchman, 2006 ;
Marchman & Fernald, 2008). Such links suggest that efficient real-time
language use and lexical knowledge are directly coupled, working together
to support language learning. Language processing has long been a focus of
psycholinguistic research with bilingual adults, and there is now growing
interest in studies of language processing by bilingual infants and children
as well (see Werker & Byers-Heinlein, 2008). One goal of the current study
is to provide a first look at the real-time processing of spoken language in
early simultaneous bilinguals, focusing on two questions. First, to what
extent is children's efficiency in online interpretation of familiar words in
one language predictive of their efficiency in online interpretation of familiar
words in the other language ? And second, do we see relations between
speed of spoken word recognition and vocabulary knowledge in bilingual
children that are similar to those previously reported in studies of
monolinguals ?
By studying bilingual children, we have a unique opportunity to
distinguish among alternative explanations of relations between vocabulary
and processing efficiency that cannot be disentangled in research on children
learning only one language. In studies with monolinguals, it is difficult to
rule out the possibility that vocabulary and lexical processing are associated
simply because each is independently influenced by a third factor, such as
intelligence or learning environment. Bilinguals, in contrast, serve as a sort
818

BILINGUAL VOCABULARY AND WORD RECOGNITION

of natural experiment in which different degrees of lexical knowledge can be
achieved in two different languages although the language learner remains
the same, i.e. ` holding the child factor constant ' (Pearson, Fernandez,
Lewedeg & Oller, 1997 : 43). Thus a second goal of this study is to contrast
the view that links between early processing efficiency and vocabulary size
can be explained in terms of relations to third-party factors with an
alternative view, that efficiency in spoken word recognition is central to
children's learning of language.
Individual differences in lexical development and spoken language
understanding
By age 2 ; 6, children can typically say hundreds of different words and
understand many more. Nevertheless, there is considerable variation in the
timing and rate of early vocabulary growth (Fenson, Marchman, Thal,
Dale, Reznick & Bates, 2006 ; Jackson-Maldonado, Thal, Marchman,
Newton, Fenson & Conboy, 2003). It is well documented that early language
experience is one factor contributing to individual differences in vocabulary
growth (e.g. Hart & Risley, 1995; Huttenlocher, Haight, Bryk, Seltzer &
Lyons, 1991). At the same time, the link between what is `in' the input and
what children learn is necessarily indirect. Language outcomes are not only
a function of the linguistic experience available to the child, but are also a
function of the child's facility in encoding and manipulating that information
(Hoff, 2006). Recent investigations of the mechanisms that guide early
language learning have focused not only on the information potentially
available in child-directed speech (Mintz, Newport & Bever, 2002), but also
on the sophisticated processing skills that enable young language learners to
make use of such information to segment words (Saffran, Aslin & Newport,
1996) and to map those words onto meanings (Graf Estes, Evans, Alibali &
Saffran, 2007).
Other research has shown that individual differences in information
processing abilities are associated with variation in language outcomes.
Auditory processing skills in infancy, such as the ability to discriminate native
and non-native speech contrasts or to rapidly analyze formant transitions,
predict early lexical development (Benasich & Tallal, 2002 ; Tsao, Liu &
Kuhl, 2004). Efficiency in spoken word recognition is also predictive of later
language outcomes. A longitudinal study using real-time measures of
language comprehension with monolingual English learners revealed that
those children who were faster in lexical processing at age 2;1 demonstrated
faster vocabulary growth across the second year (Fernald et al., 2006). In a
follow-up study with the same children six years later, Marchman &
Fernald (2008) found that those who were more efficient in spoken word
recognition as infants also performed better on standardized tests of
819

M A R C H M A N E T A L.

language and cognitive outcomes at age 8; 0. The long-term predictive
validity of early processing measures is further confirmed in ongoing studies
of children with late-onset vocabulary. Those late talkers who are less efficient
in speech processing are more likely than their peers to remain at risk for
language delays throughout the preschool years, effects that are evident in
both English- and Spanish-learning children (Fernald, 2009 ; Marchman &
Fernald, 2009).
How do we explain such links between individual differences in early
speech processing efficiency and variation in both concurrent and long-term
language outcomes in monolingual children ? One way in which skilled
language understanding could facilitate vocabulary growth is that more
efficient processing frees up resources to attend to and encode co-occurring
visual/auditory patterns that are critical in lexical learning (Fernald et al.,
2006). Children who know more words may also have more richly instantiated lexical representations, which could lead to more efficient lexical
access during real-time processing (e.g. Dapretto & Bjork, 2000). If so, then
children with more efficient processing and with larger vocabularies are
likely to be those children who can more effectively encode lexical-semantic
or morphosyntactic regularities that obtain within and across words and
that are crucial for building language.
Much less is known about early vocabulary development in young children
learning more than one language at the same time. Although individual
differences are also evident among bilingual children, the available research
suggests that in each of their two languages, young bilinguals generally
follow a developmental trajectory that is similar to that of monolinguals.
However, early in development, those children who produce many words in
Spanish are not necessarily those who produce many words in English.
Thus correlations between the size of children's vocabulary in each of their
two languages are typically only moderate (Pearson, Fernandez & Oller,
1993). Although in older bilingual children, across-language correlations
have been demonstrated in several oral language and literacy skills
(Cobo-Lewis, Eilers, Pearson & Umbel, 2002), the unbalanced outcomes in
early vocabulary among younger bilinguals are likely due to the fact that
they are typically exposed to the two languages to different degrees and/or
that exposure to each language is distributed over different learning contexts
(e.g. home vs. daycare). And while bilingual children tend to score lower
in vocabulary than monolinguals in each language evaluated separately,
they generally perform at age level when assessed with composite measures
that take both languages into account (Pearson et al., 1993 ; Pearson &
Fernandez, 1994). For example, Total Vocabulary Size (TVS) sums the
words a child is reported to produce in each language (e.g. Spanish
words+English words). Other measures like Total Conceptual Vocabulary
(TCV) focus on the number of ` concepts ' that the child is reported to
820

BILINGUAL VOCABULARY AND WORD RECOGNITION

produce, regardless of the language used (i.e. the number of words reported
in Spanish only, in English only, and in both English and Spanish). Since
translation equivalents (e.g. dog and perro) are counted only once, TCV
provides a more conservative estimate than measures that do not correct for
overlap in vocabulary across the languages. At the same time, TCV assumes
that translation equivalents reflect the same basic underlying conceptual
content in each language, and that knowing a word with roughly the same
meaning in two languages is generally equivalent to knowing that word in
just one (Patterson & Pearson, 2004 ; Bedore, Pena, Garcia & Cortez, 2005).
The assessment of vocabulary in bilinguals is clearly challenging and
normative data are sorely needed. However, existing evidence based on
observational and parent-report measures suggests that lexical development
is not generally compromised in bilinguals, and that young learners are
typically adept at handling the challenges of learning two languages at the
same time.
A number of experimental studies have explored how young infants begin
to make use of language-specific phonetic information in associating a novel
word form with a particular object, using the ` switch' technique. Fennell,
Byers-Heinlein & Werker (2007) found that monolingual infants succeeded
in this task a few months earlier than did bilingual infants. While such
findings may reflect the additional demands that bilinguals face when
tracking and organizing the multifaceted regularities in speech, this apparent
developmental delay may instead point to a degree of flexibility that is
adaptive for learning two languages at the same time. Other studies suggest
that success at word learning in these tasks is influenced by the degree of
concordance between phonetic features of the speech stimuli used in testing
and those with which the child is most familiar. Both monolingual and
bilingual infants perform best when tested with stimuli that closely match
the speech they hear in their daily language experience (Mattock, Polka,
Rvachew & Krehm, in press).
However, little is known regarding the impact of learning two languages
on children's lexical processing during real-time spoken language comprehension. In the current study, we ask how bilingual two-year-olds interpret
familiar words as the speech signal unfolds in time in both Spanish and
English, examining their processing efficiency in each language in relation
to their productive vocabulary in each language. Are children who are more
skilled in online comprehension in Spanish also those who know more
Spanish words, even when they are also learning English ? Or, is children's
skill in spoken language understanding linked to the total number of
words that they know in both languages taken together, not each language
individually ? Two general patterns of outcomes are possible. First, children
with more facility in processing in Spanish might also be more adept in
English, while those who are relatively slower in processing in Spanish are
821

M A R C H M A N E T A L.

slower in English as well. In this case, processing efficiency would be
comparable between languages within a given child, unrelated to the child's
particular lexical level in each language. Efficiency in lexical processing
could reflect some more general cognitive skill in the child, and so we might
also expect that speed in each language would be most strongly correlated
with a general measure of success in lexical learning, i.e. a composite measure
that takes into account the overall size of the lexicon across the two languages.
An alternative possibility is that processing efficiency in one language is only
weakly predictive of efficiency in the other. In this case, a bilingual child's
processing efficiency might differ between the two languages, but would be
associated with vocabulary size within each language, i.e. processing speed
and vocabulary knowledge would be correlated within English and within
Spanish. This latter pattern would suggest a tight link between speed of
processing and vocabulary knowledge in bilinguals that is similar to that
observed in monolinguals. We would also expect that any correlations
between lexical processing in each language and composite measures of
vocabulary would be moderate, reflecting individual differences in general
information processing abilities that remain after within-language relations
are taken into account.
Exploring associations between spoken language processing and vocabulary
growth
Regardless of whether it is observed in monolinguals or bilinguals, a
correlation between speed of spoken language understanding and vocabulary
size in a particular language could result from a direct association - for
example, if efficiency in information processing enables children to learn
more words from the input they experience. However, this correlation could
also be indirect, if children who are faster to recognize words in real-time
comprehension are better word learners simply because both skills are
independently related to other skills that influence learning and processing
in a parallel fashion. For example, more intelligent children might be better
at word learning and lexical access, not because these skills are intricately
related, but because more intelligent children simply do better at each task
in a non-overlapping way. Such ` third-party ' explanations provide an
alternative account of the observed correlations, undermining any explanation
based on a direct relation between processing efficiency and vocabulary
learning.
This conundrum is exemplified in recent research on the influence of
early linguistic experience on later language outcomes. Given that vocabulary
growth is influenced by the quantity and quality of talk that children hear
(e.g. Hart & Risely, 1995 ; Huttenlocher et al., 1991), it could be that the
observed correlations between vocabulary size and processing speed are
822

BILINGUAL VOCABULARY AND WORD RECOGNITION

explained by the fact that each is influenced independently by early
language experience. And it is plausible that those features of the input
that facilitate children's vocabulary learning could also have a positive yet
independent impact on children's ability to interpret words in real time. A
recent study of monolingual Spanish-language learners from low-income
Latino families by Hurtado, Marchman & Fernald (2008) explored this
possibility. Children's speed of spoken word recognition and vocabulary
knowledge at ages 1; 6 and 2 ; 0 were examined in relation to features
of maternal talk. Children whose mothers produced more talk during a
naturalistic free-play session at age 1 ; 6 were those children who had bigger
productive vocabularies and who were faster to recognize familiar words six
months later. This study replicated with young Spanish learners the link
between the quantity and quality of child-directed speech by the caregiver
and the child's vocabulary that is well established for English learners.
Moreover, Hurtado et al. also demonstrated for the first time that early
language experience also affects the efficiency with which children process
words in real-time comprehension. Finally, and most relevant here, the
influences of maternal talk on vocabulary outcomes and processing speed
were largely overlapping. Rather than input operating independently
on both processing efficiency and vocabulary, as a third-party influence,
vocabulary knowledge and facility in lexical comprehension shared their
relation to input, suggesting that both aspects of language proficiency work
together to support language learning.
Although the Hurtado et al. (2008) study helps rule out one alternative
explanation for the link between vocabulary and processing, it is still possible
that independent relations with some other cognitive ability account for this
association. In studies of monolingual children, it is difficult to rule out such
alternative explanations, since just one level of lexical processing skill and
one body of vocabulary knowledge can be assessed for each child. However,
by examining how spoken language processing relates to vocabulary
knowledge in children learning two languages simultaneously, child factors
are held constant while processing efficiency and vocabulary size in the two
languages are free to vary. Thus, studies of simultaneous bilinguals enable
researchers to evaluate explanations of links among factors that are difficult
to tease apart in typical monolingual learning circumstances (Conboy & Thal,
2006 ; Conboy & Mills, 2005 ; Marchman, Martinez-Sussmann & Dale, 2004).
Overview of current study
Here we examine relations between reported vocabulary and processing
efficiency in children aged 2 ; 6 learning Spanish and English at the same
time. These simultaneous bilinguals have been exposed to Spanish and
English from a very young age, typically from birth. Nevertheless, in terms
823

M A R C H M A N E T A L.

of their expressive vocabulary, they range from producing many words in
Spanish with only a few words in English to producing many words in
English and fewer words in Spanish. As in previous studies, we expect that
vocabulary in Spanish will be only moderately correlated with vocabulary in
English. But will a child's efficiency of lexical processing in Spanish predict
their efficiency of lexical processing in English? It could be that within
bilingual children, processing speed is similar across the two languages,
unlike vocabulary size. In this case, speed of spoken language understanding
in an online comprehension task could be an index of children's overall level
of processing skill, regardless of their particular accomplishments in either
Spanish or English. In that case, the best predictor of processing speed
should be a general measure of vocabulary that takes into account both
languages. Such a pattern of findings would suggest that the relations
between processing efficiency and vocabulary size observed in monolingual
children reflect the fact that processing speed and lexical knowledge are
both independently related to some other cognitive ability. Or it could be
that processing efficiency in Spanish and English are only weakly correlated,
with speed in a particular language most strongly associated instead with
the child's vocabulary level in that language. A pattern of strong withinlanguage but weak between-language relations would suggest that the
correlations previously reported for monolinguals reflect a common set of
representations or mechanisms that are shared in the context of constructing
a particular language.
METHOD

Participants
As part of an ongoing longitudinal study, 26 children (12 females, 14 males)
learning both Spanish and English participated at age 2;6 (range=
2 ; 5-2 ; 10). This study was conducted in a community laboratory and
resource center located in a family neighborhood a few miles from the
Stanford University campus. The majority of residents in this community
are Latino families, many of whom are immigrants to the USA from
Mexico. The center is staffed by fully bilingual and bicultural researchers
who conduct all recruitment efforts and communicate with the families
in Spanish, English or both, depending on their preference. Families are
recruited through various sources, including county birth records, the
University hospital, community health facilities, preschools, library
programs, email lists, mothers' clubs and word-of-mouth referrals.
Parents reported that all children had uncomplicated births and no serious
illnesses, developmental delays or hearing loss. Half were first-born. Most
parents (93 %) were native speakers of Spanish, although more than 85 %
reported near-native proficiency in both Spanish and English. While 19% of
824

BILINGUAL VOCABULARY AND WORD RECOGNITION

the mothers and 16% of the fathers had less than a high school education,
many mothers (62%) and fathers (54 %) reported some college, with two
fathers and three mothers reporting advanced degrees. The sample is middle
class on average, however, all socioeconomic groups were represented.
Scores on the Hollingshead Four Factor Index of Social Status
(Hollingshead, 1975) ranged from 18 to 66 (M=41.3, SD=16.0). Income
levels also spanned a broad range.
Measures
Language background interview. Following Marchman et al. (2004), a
language environment interview was conducted by a bilingual research
assistant (RA) in the language that was most comfortable for the parent.
The RA probed how much time the child spent with each individual in
regular contact with the child, noting the language(s) they spoke to the
child. Total hours of Spanish and English exposure per week were summed
across all individuals (excluding TV) and converted to a proportion. All
children heard at least twelve waking hours/week in both Spanish and in
English, with most (58%) hearing both languages from their parents. The
relative balance of exposure to the two languages ranged from 86% Spanish
(14% English) to 9% Spanish (91% English), with a mean Spanish :English
ratio of 56 : 44. Approximately 46% of the participants (n=12) heard more
Spanish than English, 23% (n=6) heard more English than Spanish, and
the remainder (n=8) had balanced exposure, according to parental report.
Vocabulary. Caregivers completed two parent-report instruments : the
Inventario del Desarrollo de Habilidades Comunicativas : Inventario II
(Spanish) and the MacArthur-Bates Communicative Development
Inventory : Words & Sentences (English). The instruments were typically
completed by one of the child's parents ; however, in a few cases, the reporter was another adult (e.g. nanny, grandmother) who spent time with the
child on a regular basis. Reporters were selected who could read in that
language and who were familiar with the child's use of that language.
Vocabulary was the number of words reported as `comprende y dice ' or
` understands and says ' (out of 680). Percentile scores were derived for
each language score using monolingual norms (Fenson et al., 2006 ;
Jackson-Maldonado et al., 2003). For some analyses, children were grouped
into higher and lower vocabulary groups based on median splits of raw
scores for Spanish and for English.
We assessed children's composite vocabulary in Spanish and English in
two ways. First, Total Vocabulary Size (TVS) was computed as the sum
of the two language scores (reported words in Spanish+reported words
in English). Second, Total Conceptual Vocabulary (TCV) captured the
number of ` concepts ' a child is reported to produce (of 804) in Spanish
825

M A R C H M A N E T A L.

only+English only+both languages. Translation equivalents were based on
Marchman & Martinez-Sussmann (2002) and available in the CDI Scoring
Program (Marchman, 2004). Since bilingual norms are not available for
these composite measures, they were compared to both English and Spanish
monolingual norms (Fenson et al., 2006 ; Jackson-Maldonado et al., 2003).
Given the problems associated with comparing multilanguage composite
scores to single-language norms, these values are provided for descriptive
purposes only.
Spoken language understanding. Children's efficiency of spoken language
processing was assessed in two visits using the `looking-while-listening '
procedure, which yields precise measures of the time course of spoken
language interpretation from moment to moment (see Fernald, Zangl,
Portillo & Marchman, 2008). Children viewed pairs of pictures on a screen,
and their looking patterns were video-recorded as they listened to speech
naming one of the pictures. The order of the testing sessions was established
on an individual basis with the first visit conducted in the child's strongest
language as reported by the parent. The speech stimuli were chosen to be
as parallel as possible in Spanish and English, consisting of prerecorded
sentences containing a common set of early learned nouns. Words were
selected to be highly familiar to both Spanish- and English-learning children
in this age range (Dale & Fenson, 1996 ; Jackson-Maldonado et al., 2003).
However, in order to ensure that these nouns were familiar to children learning
both Spanish and English, parents completed two additional questionnaires
where they indicated whether their child understood the particular target
nouns used in this study in Spanish, English, or both Spanish and English.
In each language session, the target nouns occurred in sentence-final
position in a familiar carrier frame on twenty-four trials (e.g. Donde esta el
carro ? ; Where's the car?). On an additional sixteen trials, the carrier phrase
also included a color adjective (e.g. Donde esta el carro azul ? ; Where's the
blue car?), or a sentence-initial verb semantically related to the target noun
(e.g. Comete la galleta ; Eat the cookie). All target nouns (Spanish M=735,
670-800; English M=720 ms, 650-875 ms) were presented in yoked pairs
matched in duration and syllable length, and in Spanish, grammatical gender,
except for eight familiar frame trials in which the target was paired with a
noun of a different grammatical gender (e.g. el carro/la pelota). Three filler
trials were interspersed (e.g. Te gustan las fotos? Aqui vienen mas ! ; Do you
like the pictures ? Here are some more!). A female native Spanish-English
bilingual recorded several tokens of each sentence in each language. Final
tokens were chosen based on naturalness as well as cross-token comparability
in duration of the carrier phrase and target word.
Visual stimuli were identical in Spanish and English, consisting of digitized
photographs of real objects presented on gray backgrounds. Two different
picture tokens were used for each target word, closely matched in size and
826

BILINGUAL VOCABULARY AND WORD RECOGNITION

brightness. Pictures were presented in pairs, with each object serving as
both target and distracter. Side of target picture was counterbalanced
across trials. Trials were presented in one of four pseudo-random orders,
counterbalanced across participants.
Procedure
Testing in the looking-while-listening procedure was conducted in two
sessions, one in Spanish and one in English, approximately one week apart.
To the extent possible, within a given session all RAs consistently spoke
only Spanish or English, as appropriate. During testing, the parent wore
opaque sunglasses to obstruct their view of the images. On the forty critical
trials, the two pictures were shown in silence for 2 seconds, continuing for 1
second after sentence offset, for a total trial duration of 6-8 seconds. Each
session lasted about 5 minutes.
Children's eye movements were coded off-line without sound using custom
software by highly trained observers blind to the side of the target picture.
On each trial, coders noted frame-by-frame whether the child's eyes fixated
the right picture, left picture, between the pictures, or away from both
pictures. A second coder recoded 25% of the trials for 25% of the participants,
yielding an overall inter-coder reliability of 97% for Spanish and 96%
for English. Mean reaction time (RT) to shift to the correct referent was
calculated for each child in Spanish and English based only on those distracter-initial trials where the child started on the distracter and shifted to
the target picture within 300-1800 ms from target word onset. Trials on
which the child shifted sooner than 300 ms or later than 1800 ms from noun
onset were excluded, since these early and late shifts are not likely to be in
response to the stimulus sentence (see Fernald et al., 2008). Moreover, trials
on which the child was not reported to understand the target word were
deleted from all analyses (Spanish M=1.2, range=0-6; English M=0.3
trials deleted, range=0-3). Thus, final mean RTs are based on different
numbers of trials across participants and session (Spanish : M=10.7, 2-17 ;
English M=10.0 trials, range=1-18).

RESULTS

Vocabulary outcomes
We first examine children's vocabulary outcomes in Spanish and English.
As shown in Table 1, mean vocabulary sizes were comparable in Spanish
and English, with a range of scores in both languages. However, percentiles
show that children fell below age-based expectations compared to monolinguals, scoring on average significantly below the 50th percentile in both
Spanish (t(25)=3.7, p=0.001) and English (t(25)=6.3, p=0.001). Table 1
827

M A R C H M A N E T A L.
TABLE

1. Mean, standard deviation (SD) and range of vocabulary in
Spanish and English
Mean (SD)

Range

Spanish
Rawa
Percentileb

281.3 (194.7)
29.4 (28.7)

3-676
1-99

English
Rawa
Percentilec

271.8 (204.3)
18.7 (25.4)

17-667
1-97

Total Vocabulary Score (TVS)
Rawd
Percentile (Spanish)b
Percentile (English)c

553.2 (242.0)
66.1 (33.2)
58.1 (38.7)

167-978
13-99
7-99

Total Conceptual Vocabulary (TCV)
Rawe
Percentile (Spanish)b
Percentile (English)c

461.8 (166.9)
55.1 (29.1)
41.6 (30.3)

158-701
13-99
10-99

a
Number of words reported as ` comprende y dice' or ` understands & says' on the CDI :
Inventario II (Spanish) and CDI : Words & Sentences (English).
b
Percentile score based on norms in Jackson-Maldonado et al. (2003).
c
Percentile score based on norms in Fenson et al. (2006).
d
Number of words produced reported in Spanish+English.
e
Number of concepts reported in Spanish Only+English Only+both Spanish and English,
counting translation equivalents only once (adapted from Pearson & Fernandez, 1994, using
translation equivalents defined in the CDI Scoring program (Marchman, 2004)).

also presents raw and percentile scores for the two composite measures,
TVS and TCV. Because the composite estimates are by definition larger
than the Spanish or English scores taken individually, the mean percentiles
for TVS and TCV were also consistently higher, near or above the 50th
percentile compared to either Spanish or English norms. While these
comparisons should be viewed as only generally descriptive, the findings are
consistent with those of previous studies in which bilingual children
demonstrate progress in vocabulary comparable to monolinguals if assessed
using a composite measure.
Although Spanish and English vocabularies were similar in size overall,
the correlation between vocabulary size in Spanish and in English was
negative and non-significant (r(26)=x0.27, ns). That is, for individual
children, the number of words produced in Spanish was not predictive of
the number produced in English. This finding likely reflects the fact that
most children had unbalanced Spanish-English exposure. Indeed, the
Spanish : English ratio, indicating the relative balance of exposure to the two
languages, was significantly positively correlated with Spanish vocabulary
(r(26)=0.52, p<0.01) and negatively correlated with English vocabulary
(r(26)=x0.63, p<0.001).
828

BILINGUAL VOCABULARY AND WORD RECOGNITION
TABLE

2. Mean, standard deviation (SD) and range on reaction time
(RT) in Spanish and English

Reaction Time (ms)a
Spanish
English
a

Mean (SD)

Range

879 (161)
860 (151)

558-1240
638-1233

Mean latency to initiate an eye-movement (in ms) on distracter-initial trials.

Speed of spoken language processing
Turning to children's performance in the online comprehension task,
descriptive statistics for mean RT are shown in Table 2. Mean RTs in
Spanish and English were virtually identical, indicating similar overall
processing speed in Spanish and English for children as a group. However,
the within-child correlation between mean RT in Spanish and in English
was weak (r(26)=x0.04, ns). Those children who were more efficient at
lexical processing in Spanish were not necessarily those who were more
efficient in English. Thus, speed of spoken word recognition in Spanish did
not predict speed of word recognition in English, indicating that lexical
processing skills in the two languages were dissociable in these young
bilingual children. As with vocabulary, we might see different levels of
processing efficiency in two languages within a single bilingual child
because these children are exposed to Spanish and English to different
degrees. The Spanish : English ratio was modestly related to children's RT
in English (r(26)=0.36, p<0.04, one-tailed). Children who heard relatively
more English (and less Spanish) in their day-to-day interactions tended to
be faster to interpret English words than were children with fewer daily
opportunities to hear English. At the same time, RT in Spanish was only
weakly related to the ratio of Spanish : English exposure (r(26)=x0.11, ns).
A closer investigation of the data revealed that some Spanish-dominant
children were slower in Spanish than what one would expect based on
parental report of their child's relative exposure to Spanish and English.

Within- and across-language relations in vocabulary and speech
processing efficiency
We next examine whether lexical processing efficiency is aligned instead
with children's actual accomplishments in learning Spanish or English words,
over and above their reported level of exposure to each language, focusing
first on associations between processing efficiency and vocabulary size. To
provide an overview of the specificity and strength of the relations, Figure 1
presents first-order correlations between processing and vocabulary both
829

M A R C H M A N E T A L.

-0.04

English
RT

-0.63**/-0.56**

0.05

English
Vocabulary

Spanish
RT

0.18

-0.27

-0.41*/-0.42*

Spanish
Vocabulary

Fig. 1. Summary of correlation analyses examining within- and across-language associations
between RT in the looking-while-listening task and reported vocabulary in Spanish and
English. First-order correlation coefficients (r) are provided for all links. For within-language
associations, the second number in the pair represents the partial coefficient, controlling for
proportion of relative Spanish-to-English exposure, and vocabulary and RT in the other
language.

within and across languages. Note that correlations within each language
were consistently significant, while correlations between the two languages
were not. Mean RT in Spanish was significantly related to vocabulary in
Spanish (r(26)=x0.41, p<0.04), and unrelated to vocabulary in English ;
and mean RT in English was significantly correlated with vocabulary in
English (r(26)=x0.63, p<0.001), but unrelated to Spanish vocabulary.
Thus, within each language, children with larger vocabularies were those
children who were more efficient at identifying the appropriate referent of a
familiar word during real-time language understanding. Analogously,
children who were reported to know fewer words in Spanish or English
were less efficient at processing familiar Spanish or English words. It is
important to note that these analyses included only those trials with target
words that children were reported to comprehend. Hence, the observed
patterns cannot be due to the fact that children with smaller vocabularies
were less likely to be familiar with the particular words they were tested on.
Instead, children's efficiency in interpreting familiar words in Spanish and
English was linked to the size of their overall vocabulary in each language.
The data presented so far indicate significant relations between vocabulary
and speed of spoken language processing in bilingual learners, similar to
those reported for monolinguals (Fernald et al., 2006 ; Hurtado et al., 2007).
While these results are promising, one must further establish that these
relations remain significant after taking into account the variance associated
with factors that operate outside the specific tasks of learning vocabulary
words or interpreting words in real time. Figure 1 summarizes the correlation
analyses examining within and across language associations between RT in
830

BILINGUAL VOCABULARY AND WORD RECOGNITION

the online comprehension task and reported vocabulary in Spanish and
English. In the within-language analyses where two numbers are shown, the
second number in the pair shows partial correlations after controlling for
mean RT and vocabulary in the other language, as well as the relative balance
of Spanish-English exposure. These partial coefficients are nearly identical
to the first-order values, indicating that individual differences in vocabulary
size and processing efficiency were related over and above the variance that
is attributable to the child's particular diet of linguistic input in Spanish and
English and their accomplishments in the other language. These analyses
provide strong evidence for meaningful links between processing efficiency
and vocabulary knowledge, and help rule out the possibility that analogous
correlations previously observed in monolingual children are actually the
result of independent relations to a third-party factor.
To further illustrate the relations between vocabulary size and processing
efficiency, children were grouped based on a median split of vocabulary raw
scores in Spanish and English. Figures 2a and 2b provide an overview of the
time course of orienting to the target picture in children as a function of
vocabulary group in English and Spanish, respectively. In each figure, the
lines represent the mean proportion of distracter-initial trials on which
children fixated the correct referent at every 33 ms interval, with error bars
indicating the SE of the mean over participants. For English (Figure 2a),
children who were reported to know more words in English fixated the
target picture more than 125 ms sooner (M=788, SD 108) than did those
children who knew fewer English words (M=922 ms, SD 158) (t(24)=2.5,
p=0.03). A similar, albeit weaker, pattern was observed in Spanish (Figure
2b). Children with larger reported Spanish vocabularies demonstrated faster
mean RTs to the target picture (M=811, SD=154), as compared to children
with lower vocabularies (M=927, SD=149) (t(24)=2.3, p=0.07).
Finally, we examined the relation between the composite measures of
vocabulary and children's speed of processing in Spanish and English.
Correlations between TVS and RT approached significance in Spanish
(r(26)=x0.29, p<0.08, one-tailed), and were somewhat stronger for
English (r(26)=x0.39, p<0.03, one tailed). TCV was marginally related to
mean RT in both Spanish (r(26)=x0.31, p>0.07, one-tailed) and English
(r(26)=x0.33, p>0.06, one-tailed). These findings reveal that children
who are faster in processing Spanish or English words are likely to know
more words overall, regardless of language. Thus, some variance in
children's efficiency in spoken language processing is associated with
children's skill in learning words more generally. While these correlations
are somewhat more modest than those observed between processing speed
and vocabulary size within Spanish and within English, 8-15% of the
variance in children's processing speed is accounted for by overall measures
of vocabulary.
831

M A R C H M A N E T A L.

(a)
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0

500

1000

1500

0

500

1000

1500

(b)
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

Fig. 2A and 2B. Mean proportion of trials on which children fixated the target picture
on distracter-initial trials as a function of time (in ms) from the onset of the target noun
in English (Figure 2A) and Spanish (Figure 2B). Based on a median split of vocabulary
raw scores in each language, the top line represents the time course of correct shifting
from distracter-to-target by children who knew more words, the lower line shows mean
proportion shifting for those children who knew fewer words. The solid vertical lines
represent target noun offset; error bars represent SEs over participants.

832

BILINGUAL VOCABULARY AND WORD RECOGNITION
DISCUSSION

This study examined bilingual children's lexical knowledge and their fluency
in understanding familiar words during real-time spoken language
understanding. We found that these young bilingual children, as a group,
were just as fast to identify the referents of familiar spoken words in
Spanish as in English. However, children's mean RTs in Spanish and in
English were uncorrelated. That is, in these two-and-a-half-year-old children
learning Spanish and English at the same time, a child's facility with online
spoken language comprehension in one language did not predict their
facility in the other language. Instead, efficiency of online language
understanding in Spanish was tightly linked to the number of words that
the children knew in Spanish, and was unrelated to vocabulary size in
English. Analogously, speed of processing in English was significantly
correlated with vocabulary in English, but not with vocabulary in Spanish.
Crucially, these patterns held even when variance attributable to exposure
balance, as well as processing speed and vocabulary in the other language,
were taken into account. For both languages, children's speed of spoken
language understanding in Spanish or English was tightly yoked to their
vocabulary knowledge in that language. These findings replicate, in a diverse
population of Spanish-English bilinguals, the correlations between speed
of lexical access and vocabulary knowledge that have been reported for
monolingual children learning either English or Spanish (Fernald et al.,
2006 ; Hurtado et al., 2007). Moreover, these findings suggest that efficiency
in spoken language understanding and vocabulary knowledge go
hand-in-hand, regardless of whether a child is learning one language or two.
Understanding the links between efficiency in language processing
and vocabulary learning
Taken together, strong within-language but weak across-language relations
support the conclusion that the correlations between processing and
vocabulary size observed here are not reducible to independent associations
to child-based factors. While previous studies with monolingual children
could not rule out such alternative explanations, research with children
learning two languages allows an examination of the associations between
lexical processing efficiency and vocabulary size in two different languages
within a single language-learning child. Like the Hurtado et al. (2008)
study, the current findings suggest that links between children's facility in
spoken word recognition and vocabulary learning cannot be accounted for
by links to other cognitive skills that have a positive but independent impact
on children's language outcomes.
To be clear, these findings do not imply that the facility with which
children process spoken words in real time is independent of information
833

M A R C H M A N E T A L.

processing skills that operate outside the domain of language. We also found
that processing speed in each language was associated with composite
measures of vocabulary. Children's efficiency in identifying the referents of
familiar words was linked, albeit more modestly, to how many words they
could produce in both Spanish and English taken together. The fact that
some variance in overall vocabulary growth was connected to speed of word
recognition in Spanish and in English suggests a role for information
processing skills that transcend a particular language. This interpretation is
consistent with recent studies using the looking-while-listening procedure
indicating that speed of spoken word recognition in infancy has long-term
predictive validity for cognitive, as well as linguistic, outcomes in later
childhood (Marchman & Fernald, 2008). Associations between overall
vocabulary size and familiar word processing likely reflect children's
fundamental abilities to attend to, store and manipulate information over
short periods of time, skills known to underlie language functioning in
both typical and atypical populations (e.g. Gathercole, 2006). Our ongoing
longitudinal studies with Spanish-speaking monolinguals and bilingual
populations are investigating the specificity of links between early
vocabulary knowledge and lexical processing skill and later linguistic and
non-linguistic outcomes, such as working memory, attention and inhibitory
control.
Taken together, the current findings suggest that online lexical
comprehension and knowledge are meaningfully related during early
acquisition, and work together to support lexical development (Fernald et al.,
2006). These skills operate jointly with a host of language-general skills that
enable children to make sense of the linguistic input they experience during
interactions with others and to put that information to use in constructing a
working system of language. Over the course of development, children's
growing efficiency in spoken language understanding and word learning
continue to be refined in tandem, in interaction with facility in processing
both linguistic and non-linguistic information, operating in a cascade of
factors that influence children's outcomes.
Efficient spoken language processing could facilitate vocabulary development in a variety of ways. Learners who can more effectively tune into
the spoken sentence are more likely to successfully integrate the auditory
information with the visual scene, and to more quickly narrow in on the
intended referent. These children would get more out of any given exposure
to a word, assisting in the construction of richly specified lexical
representations and leading to faster and more accelerated vocabulary
growth. More efficient understanding is also likely to enable more effective
tracking of distributional regularities in the speech signal as it unfolds in
time (Saffran et al., 1996), more rapid evaluation of statistical evidence in
the scene across multiple instances of a word (Smith & Yu, 2008), and
834

BILINGUAL VOCABULARY AND WORD RECOGNITION

better monitoring of distributional cues to meanings or grammatical
categories of words (Cameron-Faulkner, Lieven & Tomasello, 2003). Of
course, it is also possible that such influences operate in the other direction
as well. Having a larger vocabulary helps to fine-tune speech processing
skills and further leads to facility in online lexical access (Dapretto & Bjork,
2000 ; Storkel, 2002). Children with larger vocabularies are likely to be
more proficient in reliably accessing lexical representations during spoken
language understanding, and in efficiently integrating multiple cues to
meaning. According to this view, vocabulary knowledge and processing
efficiency continue to collaborate as bidirectional influences that enable
children to efficiently identify and extract patterns that exist within and
across words and that are crucial for building increasingly complex systems
of lexical-semantics and grammar.
In contrast, children who are slower to understand speech are less
efficient at identifying the referents of an ongoing conversation and less able
to narrow in on information in the speech signal that could provide useful
cues to meaning. For these children, more exposures may be necessary
before form-meaning mappings become sufficiently robust to support
lexical access. Such children would require more experience with language
to build a working vocabulary and would be more likely to display
protracted growth in vocabulary. Indeed, limited vocabulary knowledge
is associated with poorly specified phonological representations (Metsala
& Walley, 1998), less robust skill at learning new words (Gershkoff-Stowe
& Hahn, 2007), and weaker systems of relations across lexical and
morphosyntactic forms (Moyle, Ellis Weismer, Evans & Lindstrom, 2007).
In children learning two languages, efficient spoken language processing
could enable children to learn more words given a particular level of
exposure to a given language than children with less efficient processing,
and could enable more effective systems of organization that allow more
robust lexical access within and across languages. As children continue to
build repertoires of form-meaning mappings in both languages, languagespecific vocabulary knowledge could further feed back on skill at
differentiating and recognizing the words that children hear in continuous
speech. Together, increased vocabulary and processing efficiency would
sharpen the bilingual learner's ability to tune into and manage information
in the input that could deepen language-specific, as well as languagegeneral, features of existing representations. Such synergistic interaction
between processing skills and vocabulary learning would also fine-tune
patterns of interconnectivity across lexical forms and meanings, and sharpen
the flexible use of form-meaning mappings during real-time language use.
For both monolinguals and bilinguals then, the skills that young children
use during the real-time comprehension of language are closely aligned with
those skills involved in learning vocabulary words.
835

M A R C H M A N E T A L.

Previous research has documented several ways in which early language
development in bilingual learners is parallel to that in monolinguals and
remarkably robust in the face of diverse learning experiences (Genesee &
Nicoladis, 2007 ; Werker & Byers-Heinlein, 2008). The current findings offer
yet another parallel, showing that relations between individual differences
in processing skills and vocabulary knowledge in children learning two
languages are similar to those previously seen in children learning just one.
In a series of follow-up studies, we are focusing on more direct comparisons
of learners from bilingual and monolingual backgrounds, examining speed
of spoken word recognition and vocabulary in SES-matched groups of
children learning only Spanish compared to those learning both Spanish
and English. These and other findings will contribute to an increasingly
comprehensive picture of the flexibility of early processing abilities in
children learning language in both monolingual and bilingual circumstances.
Sources of variability in processing efficiency and vocabulary learning
Where do these individual differences in word learning and processing come
from ? One source of variation is likely to be individual differences in the
endogenous mechanisms that underlie children's skill at attending to and
coordinating multiple sources of information in real time (Gathercole, 2006 ;
Bishop, Adams & Norbury, 2004). At the same time, variation in lexical
outcomes has been linked to differences in the quantity or quality of children's
experiences with language (Hart & Risley, 1995 ; Hoff, 2006). In the current
study with bilinguals, children's relative balance of Spanish to English
exposure significantly predicted vocabulary size. Thus, early vocabulary
outcomes in Spanish and English reflected the different amount or types of
experiences that these children have had with Spanish and English in their
day-to-day lives. The relations between speed of lexical processing and
Spanish-English balance were weaker, with some children demonstrating
less efficient lexical access than would have been predicted by their reported
level of exposure. In children who fall above some threshold of Spanish
exposure, it could be that variation in processing efficiency is more
attributable to individual variation in language learning skill than to small
variations in the amount of Spanish input.
It is also important to note that we did not consider the potential influence
of television in our exposure proportion scores. By excluding television,
which for many young Latino children is a predominant source of English
input, we may have overestimated the relative Spanish exposure that these
children received. In general, the global measure of language input used
here, while accounting for differences in vocabulary knowledge, may simply
be an instrument that is too blunt to detect meaningful individual differences
in exposure balance that influence variation in children's processing
836

BILINGUAL VOCABULARY AND WORD RECOGNITION

efficiency. Indeed, using more sensitive measures of language input based
on a naturalistic observation session, Hurtado et al. (2008) reported significant links between the amount and quality of mothers' child-directed
talk and children's speed of lexical access in monolingual Spanish learners.
Ongoing studies in our laboratory are investigating links between spoken
language understanding and more comprehensive measures of relative
Spanish to English exposure in young bilingual learners, using both parent
report and observational methods.
These findings do not suggest that early bilinguals have lexical systems
which operate in isolation. It is well known that even the youngest bilingual
learners produce mixed-language utterances (i.e. code-switch) and use
translation equivalents that are systematically accessed in different contexts
(Paradis, Nicoladis & Genesee, 2000). The current study was not designed
to address whether there is between-language ` cross-talk' during real-time
language comprehension for these bilingual language learners, an issue that
is also being explored in our ongoing research. The current results should
also not imply that children's learning of words in one language has no
impact on their word learning in the other. While several studies have
shown that early oral language skills, especially those involving vocabulary,
are likely to be more independent across languages than are literacy skills
(e.g. Cobo-Lewis et al., 2002), more research is necessary to determine
the degree to which early vocabulary accomplishments in Spanish might
influence early vocabulary learning in English, and vice versa. Instead, we
conclude from these findings that bilinguals approach the task of learning
two languages in ways that are similar to children who are learning only
one, at least in aspects that are relevant to this early phase of vocabulary
development.
At the same time, differences between monolinguals and bilinguals have
also been reported (e.g. Conboy & Mills, 2005; Fennell et al., 2007). For
example, there was some evidence that bilinguals may be slightly delayed
compared to monolinguals, scoring lower as a group in expressive vocabulary
compared to norms based on monolingual Spanish and English populations
(Pearson et al., 1993). But note that these children moved into the
age-appropriate range when both languages were assessed together using
the composite scores. Although norms for bilinguals on such composite
measures norms are not yet available, this preliminary finding underscores
the importance of compiling a complete picture of lexical skill in bilinguals
that takes into account children's knowledge in both of their languages, not
just in one (Patterson & Pearson, 2004 ; Bedore et al., 2005). And, although
many children who experience two languages early on will eventually
achieve native-like proficiency in both languages, success is likely to depend
on several factors, including continued exposure to each language, the
contexts inside and outside the home in which children experience the
837

M A R C H M A N E T A L.

languages they are learning, and the status of both languages in the minority
and majority culture (de Houwer, 2007).

CONCLUSIONS

The strength and specificity of links between lexical processing speed and
vocabulary knowledge in these young bilinguals suggest that children's
early efficiency in spoken language understanding in real time is directly
related to their facility in word learning. These findings demonstrate that
correlations between speed of spoken word recognition and expressive
language outcomes are parallel in monolingual and bilingual learners, and
that skill in online comprehension is associated with vocabulary outcomes
regardless of whether the child is learning one language or two. Moreover,
modest associations between processing efficiency and language-general
measures of vocabulary offer additional evidence for meaningful links
between information processing skills and success in language learning,
links that transcend a particular language. By examining these relations in
children learning two languages, the current study supports the view that
children's skill at abstracting information from early language input as they
are building a working lexicon relates fundamentally to the mechanisms
underlying the construction of language.

REFERENCES
Bedore, L. M., Pena, E. D., Garcia, M. & Cortez, C. (2005). Conceptual versus monolingual
scoring : When does it make a difference? Language, Speech & Hearing Services in Schools
36, 188-200.
Benasich, A. A. & Tallal, P. (2002). Infant discrimination of rapid auditory cues predicts
later language impairment. Behavioural Brain Research 136(1), 31-49.
Bishop, D. V. M., Adams, C. V. & Norbury, C. F. (2004). Using nonword repetition to
distinguish genetic and environmental influences on early literacy development : A study
of 6-year-old twins. American Journal of Medical Genetics 129B, 94-96.
Cameron-Faulkner, T., Lieven, E. & Tomasello, M. (2003). A construction based analysis of
child directed speech. Cognitive Science 27(6), 843-73.
Cobo-Lewis, A. B., Eilers, R. E., Pearson, B. Z. & Umbel, V. C. (2002). Interdependence
of Spanish and English knowledge in language and literacy among bilingual children. In
D. K. Oller & R. E. Eilers (eds), Language and Literacy in Bilingual Children, 118-32.
Tonawanda, NY : Multilingual Matters.
Conboy, B. T. & Mills, D. L. (2005). Two languages, one developing brain : event-related
potentials to words in bilingual toddlers. Developmental Science 9(1), F1-F12.
Conboy, B. T. & Thal, D. J. (2006). Ties between the lexicon and grammar : Cross-sectional
and longitudinal studies of bilingual toddlers. Child Development 77(3), 712-35.
Dale, P. S. and Fenson, L. (1996). Lexical development norms for young children.
Behavioral Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers 28, 125-27.
Dapretto, M. & Bjork, E. L. (2000). The development of word retrieval abilities in the
second year and its relation to early vocabulary growth. Child Development 71, 635-48.
de Houwer, A. (2007). Parental language input patterns and children's bilingual use. Applied
Psycholinguistics 28, 411-24.

838

BILINGUAL VOCABULARY AND WORD RECOGNITION

Fennell, C. T., Byers-Heinlein, K. & Werker, J. F. (2007). Using speech sounds to guide
word learning : The case of bilingual infants. Child Development 78, 1510-25.
Fenson, L., Marchman, V. A., Thal, D., Dale, P. S., Reznick, J. S. & Bates, E. (2006).
MacArthur-Bates Communicative Development Inventories : User's Guide and Technical
Manual, 2nd edn. Baltimore, MD : Brookes Publishing Co.
Fernald, A. (2009). Developing efficiency in understanding spoken language : How infants
learn to listen for meaning. Invited address at the Symposium for Research in Child
Language Disorders (SRCLD). Madison, WI (June 2009).
Fernald, A., Perfors, A. & Marchman, V. A. (2006). Picking up speed in understanding :
Speech processing efficiency and vocabulary growth across the second year. Developmental
Psychology 42, 98-116.
Fernald, A., Pinto, J. P., Swingley, D., Weinberg, A. & McRoberts, G. W. (1998). Rapid
gains in speed of verbal processing by infants in the second year. Psychological Science 9,
72-75.
Fernald, A., Zangl, R., Portillo, A. L. & Marchman, V. A. (2008). Looking while listening :
Using eye movements to monitor spoken language comprehension by infants and young
children. In I. Sekerina, E. M. Fernandez & H. Clahsen (eds), Developmental
psycholinguistics : On-line methods in children's language processing, 97-135. Amsterdam :
John Benjamins.
Gathercole, S. E. (2006). Non-word repetition and word learning : The nature of the
relationship. Applied Psycholinguistics 27, 513-43.
Genesee, F. & Nicoladis, E. (2007). Bilingual first language acquisition. In E. Hoff &
M. Shatz (eds), Blackwell handbook of language development, 324-42. Malden, MA :
Blackwell Publishing.
Gershkoff-Stowe, L. & Hahn, E. (2007). Fast mapping skills in the developing lexicon.
Journal of Speech, Language & Hearing Research 50, 682-97.
Graf Estes, K., Evans, J., Alibali, M. & Saffran, J. (2007). Can infants map meaning
to newly segmented words? Statistical segmentation and word learning. Psychological
Science 18(3), 254-60.
Hart, B. & Risley, T. R. (1995). Meaningful differences in the everyday experience of young
American children. Baltimore, MD : Brookes Publishing Co.
Hoff, E. (2006). How social contexts support and shape language development.
Developmental Review 26, 55-88.
Hollingshead, A. B. (1975). Four factor index of social status. Unpublished manuscript, Yale
University, New Haven, CT.
Hurtado, N., Marchman, V. A. & Fernald, A. (2007). Spoken word recognition by
Latino children learning Spanish as their first language. Journal of Child Language 33,
227-49.
Hurtado, N., Marchman, V. A. & Fernald, A. (2008). Does input influence uptake?
Links between maternal talk, processing speed and vocabulary size in Spanish-learning
children. Developmental Science 11(6), F31-F39.
Huttenlocher, J., Haight, W., Bryk, A., Seltzer, M. & Lyons, T. (1991). Vocabulary growth :
Relation to language input and gender. Developmental Psychology 27, 236-48.
Jackson-Maldonado, D., Thal, D. J., Marchman, V. A., Newton, T., Fenson, L. & Conboy,
B. (2003). MacArthur Inventarios del Desarrollo de Habilidades Comunicativas : User's
Guide and Technical Manual. Baltimore, MD : Brookes Publishing Co.
Marchman, V. A. (2004). Scoring program for the MacArthur-Bates Communicative
Development Inventories, www.sci.sdsu.edu/cdi/scoringdb_p.htm.
Marchman, V. A. & Fernald, A. (2008). Speed of word recognition and vocabulary
knowledge in infancy predict cognitive and language outcomes in later childhood.
Developmental Science 11, F9-F16.
Marchman, V. A. & Fernald, A. (2009). Linking early efficiency in spoken language understanding to typical and atypical outcomes in preschool. Paper presented at the Biennial
Meeting of the Society for Research in Child Development (SRCD), Denver, CO (April
2009).

839

M A R C H M A N E T A L.

Marchman, V. A. & Martinez-Sussmann, C. (2002). Concurrent validity of caregiver/parent
report measures of language for children who are learning both English and Spanish.
Journal of Speech, Language & Hearing Research 45(5), 993-97.
Marchman, V. A., Martinez-Sussmann, C. & Dale, P. S. (2004). The language-specific
nature of grammatical development : Evidence from bilingual language learners.
Developmental Science 7, 212-24.
Mattock, K., Polka, L., Rvachew, S. & Krehm, M. (in press). The first steps in word
learning are easier when the shoes fit : Comparing monolingual and bilingual infants.
Developmental Science.
McCardle, P. & Hoff, E. (2004) (eds). Childhood bilingualism : Research on infancy through
school age. Clevedon : Multilingual Matters, Ltd.
Metsala, J. L. & Walley, A. C. (1998). Spoken vocabulary growth and the segmental
restructuring of lexical representations : Precursors to phonemic awareness and early
reading ability. In J. L. Metsala & L. C. Ehri (eds), Word recognition in beginning literacy,
89-120. Hillsdale, NJ : Erlbaum.
Mintz, T. H., Newport, E. L. & Bever, T. G. (2002). The distributional structure of
grammatical categories in speech to young children. Cognitive Science 26, 393-424.
Moyle, M. J., Ellis Weismer, S., Evans, J. L. & Lindstrom, M. J. (2007). Longitudinal
relationships between lexical and grammatical development in typical and late-talking
children. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research 50, 508-28.
Paradis, J., Nicoladis, E. & Genesee, F. (2000). Early emergence of structural constraints on
code-mixing : Evidence from French-English bilingual children. Bilingualism : Language
& Cognition 3(3), 245-61.
Patterson, J. & Pearson, B. Z. (2004). Bilingual lexical development : Influences, contexts
and processes. In B. A. Goldstein (ed.), Bilingual language development and disorders in
Spanish-English speakers, 77-104. Baltimore, MD : Brookes Publishing.
Pearson, B. Z. & Fernandez, S. C. (1994). Patterns of interaction in the lexical growth in two
languages of bilingual infants and toddlers. Language Learning 44, 617-53.
Pearson, B. Z., Fernandez, S. C., Lewedeg, V. & Oller, D. K. (1997). The relation of input
factors to lexical learning by bilingual infants. Applied Psycholinguistics 18, 41-58.
Pearson, B. Z., Fernandez, S. C. & Oller, D. K. (1993). Lexical development in bilingual
infants and toddlers : Comparison to monolingual norms. Language Learning 43, 93-120.
Saffran, J. R., Aslin, R. N. & Newport, E. L. (1996). Statistical learning by 8-month-old
infants. Science 274, 1926-28.
Smith, L. B. & Yu, C. (2008). Infants rapidly learn word-referent mappings via
cross-situational statistics. Cognition 106(3), 1558-68.
Storkel, H. L. (2002). Restructuring of similarity neighbourhoods in the developing mental
lexicon. Journal of Child Language 29, 251-74.
Tsao, F., Liu, H. & Kuhl, P. K. (2004). Speech perception in infancy predicts language
development in the second year of life : a longitudinal study. Child Development 75,
1067-84.
Werker, J. F. & Byers-Heinlein, K. (2008). Bilingualism in infancy : first steps in perception
and comprehension. Trends in Cognitive Science 12(4), 144-51.

840

