C Cambridge University Press 2010 doi:10.1017/S1366728909990599
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition 13 (4), 2010, 429-448 

Past tense grammaticality
judgment and production in
non-native and stressed native
English speakers

429

JA N E T L . M C D O NA L D
C R I S T I N E C . RO U S S E L
Department of Psychology, Louisiana State University

(Received: April 9, 2009; Revised: December 9, 2009; Accepted: December 17, 2009; First published online 15 March 2010)

This paper explores whether the poor mastery of morphosyntax exhibited by second language (L2) learners can be tied to
difficulties with non-syntactic processing. Specifically, we examine whether problems with English regular and irregular past
tense are related to poor L2 phonological ability and lexical access, respectively. In Experiment 1, L2 learners showed
poorer past tense mastery than native English speakers in grammaticality judgment and production tasks. L2 phonological
ability was positively correlated with correct performance on regular verbs and negatively with unmarked production. L2
lexical access was positively correlated with correct performance on irregular verbs, and negatively with overregularization
production. Experiment 2 simulated these difficulties in native English speakers by placing them under phonological
processing (noise) or lexical access (deadline) stress. Noise selectively impacted regular verbs in grammaticality judgment
but impacted all verb types in production. Deadline pressure impacted irregular verbs while sparing regular verbs across
both tasks. Thus, non-syntactic processing difficulties can have specific impacts on morphosyntactic performance in both
non-native and native English speakers.
Keywords: past tense, second language, processing stress

Second language (L2) learners often have trouble with L2
morphology and syntax, performing significantly worse
than native speakers on tests of production (Paradis,
Rice, Crago & Marquis, 2008) and grammaticality
judgment (Johnson & Newport, 1989; McDonald, 2000,
2006). They also fail to show native-like slowing in the
presence of morphological errors in online reading or
comprehension tasks (Jiang, 2004, 2007). While some
posit that this may be due to problems with acquisition
of syntactic knowledge per se (Meisel, 1997; Paradis &
Crago, 2000), others claim that the knowledge is present,
but it often fails to be expressed (Prevost & White, 2000).
This latter viewpoint begs the question of what underlies
this failure. One possible reason could be lack of mastery
of non-syntactic aspects of the second language that are
precursors to application of syntactic processes, or that
poor non-syntactic mastery increases processing load or
processing time, which in turn then affects expression
of syntactic knowledge. Evidence for the involvement of
non-syntactic processes in syntactic performance comes
from McDonald (2006). First, the study found that
measures of L2 phonological ability and L2 working
* A preliminary version of the data reported in this paper was presented
at the 47th annual meeting of the Psychonomic Society, Houston, TX.
We thank Matthew Calamia, Patrick Johnson, Alina Oster, Michael
Rhea, and Erin Thomas for help in gathering the data.

memory capacity were correlated with L2 morphological
mastery as evidenced by performance on an L2
grammaticality judgment task. Second, in a demonstration
of a possible causal link between these non-syntactic
processes and morphological mastery, native speakers
(who obviously have native command of morphology)
were made to show similar non-native patterns of
grammaticality judgment deficits by having them perform
the task under an added noise condition (i.e., impairing
their perception of the phonology), or under a memory
load (i.e., decreasing their working memory capacity).
This paper further explores the possibility that
problems involving non-syntactic aspects of language
processing are at least partially responsible for poor morphosyntactic performance in L2 speakers. We focus on one
aspect of morphology, English past tense, and investigate
possible L2 non-syntactic processing deficits that might
cause problems with past tense mastery. Since past tense
has different patterns for regular (e.g., fill-filled) and
irregular verbs (e.g., bite-bit, cut-cut), different factors
may underlie performance on these two classes. Thus,
past tense makes for an especially interesting test case for
our purposes. In addition, since the differences between
regular and irregular past tense performance have been the
focus of a controversial debate in linguistic representation
and processing, we can contribute data to this debate from
the seldom examined population of L2 learners.

Address for correspondence:
Janet L. McDonald, Department of Psychology, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA 70803, USA
psmcdo@lsu.edu

430

Janet L. McDonald and Cristine C. Roussel

Evidence that different factors influence performance
on the two verb types comes from the double dissociation
seen in neurologically impaired populations. Native
speaking populations that have trouble with regular past
tense formation (those with Parkinson's disease or anterior
aphasia) seem to have a problem centered in phonological
mastery. They often produce regular past tense forms
that are unmarked (the phonologically simpler show
for showed), or contain phonological errors (tane for
trained) (Bird, Lambon Ralph, Seidenberg, McClelland &
Patterson, 2003; Braber, Patterson, Ellis & Lambon Ralph,
2005; Lambon Ralph, Braber, McClelland & Patterson,
2005; Tyler, Randall & Marslen-Wilson, 2002b; Ullman,
Corkin, Coppola, Hickok, Growdon, Koroshetz & Pinker,
1997; Ullman, Pancheva, Love, Yee, Swinney & Hickok,
2005). Native speaking populations that seem to have
problems with irregular past tense formation (those with
Alzheimer's disease, semantic deficits or posterior aphasia, and children with poor comprehension) seem to suffer
from semantic deficits and/or difficulties with lexical
access. They often produce overregularization errors such
as holded for held (Bird et al., 2003; Miozzo, 2003;
Nation, Snowling & Clarke, 2005; Patterson, Lambon
Ralph, Hodges & McClelland, 2001; Tyler, deMornayDavies, Anokhina, Longworth, Randall & MarslenWilson, 2002a; Ullman et al., 1997; Ullman et al., 2005).
This pattern has been explained by some researchers as
involving separate processing mechanisms for the two
verb types (Pinker, 1999; Pinker & Ullman, 2002) and
by others as being consistent with a single associative
mechanism (Joanisse & Seidenberg, 1999; McClelland &
Patterson, 2002; Rumelhart & McClelland, 1986); we will
return to this debate in the general discussion.
If factors that impact impaired native speakers also
operate on non-native speakers, we can make the
following predictions: (i) non-native speakers who have
trouble with L2 phonology will struggle with regular past
tense, and will be likely to produce unmarked forms
or forms with phonological errors; and (ii) non-native
speakers who have poor vocabulary and slow lexical
access will have problems with irregular past tense, and
will be likely to produce overregularization errors. These
predictions are novel - of the studies that have specifically
focused on non-native speakers' regular and irregular
past tense abilities (Basnight-Brown, Chen, Hua, Kostic
& Feldman, 2007; Birdsong & Flege, 2001; Cameli,
Phillips, Kousaie & Panisset, 2005; Jia & Fuse, 2007),
none have considered the possible underlying factors of
phonological ability or lexical access ability as correlates
or possible agents involved in regular and irregular past
tense performance, respectively. In order to test these
predictions, a group of L2 learners with wide variation
in L2 phonological ability and L2 lexical access ability is
needed. (Note that this also means that this group is likely
to vary in factors that are correlated to mastery in these

areas - e.g., age of acquisition, length of exposure, native
language, etc.). Specifics of L2 speakers' abilities in these
areas and how weaknesses could impact performance on
regular and irregular past tense in both a grammaticality
judgment task and a production task are presented below.
Factors that may affect past tense in non-native
speakers
L2 phonological ability
Non-native speakers often differ from native speakers in
their receptive and productive mastery of L2 phonology
(Yeni-Komshian, Flege & Liu, 2000). Level of L2 mastery
in this domain is highly variable, and correlates with such
variables as age of L2 acquisition, length of residence,
native language, phonological short term memory and
even musical ability (Baker & Trofimovich, 2005; Flege,
Bohn & Jang, 1997; Sleve & Miyake, 2006; YeniKomshian et al., 2000). Difficulty with L2 phonology
makes it harder for non-native speakers to recognize
L2 words - i.e., when non-native speakers are asked to
recognize words presented in noise, significant variance
in their word recognition performance is predicted by their
L2 vowel and consonant perceptual abilities (Meador,
Flege & MacKay, 2000). In addition, poor L2 phoneme
discrimination can lead to more items competing in the
word recognition process (Weber & Cutler, 2004). For
example, if L2 learners have difficulty with the /I/-/i/
distinction in English, both ship and sheep will remain
in competition for recognition upon hearing ship, while
native English speakers will not have this problem.
If non-native speakers have poorer L2 phonology than
native speakers, they should have difficulties in tasks that
involve the detection of subtle phonological differences,
and perhaps also in producing more phonologically
complex forms. Consider first a grammaticality judgment
task in which people judge sentences containing either
the correct or incorrect past tense form. For regular verbs,
the contrast between the correct and unmarked form used
in our task (e.g., filled-fill) is subtle, being only a single
unstressed phoneme, and therefore may be difficult to
detect. For irregular verbs, the contrast between the correct
and overregularized form used in our task (e.g., bit-bited
or cut-cutted) involves vowel changes, an extra unstressed
syllable, or both, and therefore should be easier to detect.
Thus, learners with poor L2 phonology may struggle
more with detecting incorrect regular than irregular past
tense; i.e., L2 phonological ability should correlate more
highly with performance on regular verbs than irregular
verbs.
Now consider a production task. Regular past
tense forms are often phonologically more complex or
phonologically odd than irregular past tense forms -
i.e., relative to the base form, regular past tense forms

Past tense in non-native speakers and stressed native speakers
have at least one additional phoneme, while irregular
past tense forms often do not (Bird et al., 2003; Burzio,
2002). Thus, a learner with poor ability to produce L2
phonology may struggle more with regular than irregular
past tenses, and may be more likely to produce unmarked
(i.e., phonologically simpler) or phonologically related
errors across all verb types. Interestingly, a propensity for
unmarked forms may increase performance on a subclass
of irregular verbs - those that do not change form for the
past tense (e.g., cut-cut). Producing an unmarked form
due to phonological difficulties in this case would result in
an increase in correct answers for this subset of irregulars.
Thus, overall, we predict a higher positive correlation
between phonological ability and production of regular
past tense (fill-filled) than irregular past tense change
verbs (bite-bit), and perhaps a negative correlation with
production of irregular no change verbs (cut-cut).
L2 lexical access
Non-native speakers also often have weaker lexical access
ability and vocabulary knowledge than native speakers.
Level of L2 lexical ability may be tied to such factors
as age of L2 acquisition, self-rated L2 proficiency and
degree of L2 use (Kohnert, Hernandez & Bates, 1998;
Roberts, Garcia, Desrochers & Hernandez, 2002). As
a group, non-native speakers, even L2 dominant nonnative speakers, tend to have lower picture naming
scores and slower naming times than native speakers
(Gollan, Montoya, Fennema-Notestine & Morris, 2005;
Roberts et al., 2002). However, no such deficits are
shown in a picture classification task, which calls upon
semantic knowledge in the absence of lexical access
(Gollan et al., 2005). These results imply that non-native
speakers have intact semantic representations, but have
difficulty accessing lexical representations. Since naming
time deficits between non-native and native speakers
are found to disappear with repeated picture naming,
Gollan et al. (2005) hypothesized that the strength of the
connection between the phonological and the semantic
representations in each language is simply weaker in
bilingual than monolingual speakers - i.e., bilinguals
have connections to two phonological representations for
each semantic concept, and thus get effectively less
practice on either one of these connections than does
a monolingual. There is also possible interference from
having two phonological representations, one from each
language, active at the same time.
In addition, some less experienced non-native speakers
may perform poorly on picture naming because of gaps
in their lexical knowledge. In this case, they may treat
unknown words in a past tense task as nonce forms.
Previous work has shown that native speakers give
more regularized forms to nonce verbs that have regular
phonological characteristics than to nonce verbs that have

431

irregular phonological characteristics - i.e., have irregular
verbs as phonological neighbors (Ullman et al., 2005);
similar results were found when nonce verbs were given to
non-native speakers (Murphy, 2004). Therefore, the past
tense patterns given to words that a non-native speaker
may not know should follow those of the known words,
though perhaps not as strongly.
For non-native speakers who have poor lexical access
ability, we might expect difficulties with past tense similar
to other groups with impaired lexical access - i.e.,
problems with the past tense of irregular verbs, and
production of overregularization (Miozzo, 2003; Nation
et al., 2005; Patterson et al., 2001; Ullman et al., 1997).
For the grammaticality judgment task, there should be
no problems with regular verbs (fill-filled), but there
should be a correlation between lexical access ability
and the ability to distinguish correct from overregularized
irregular verbs (bit-bited or cut-cutted). Similarly, for
the production task, we should see a positive correlation
between lexical access ability and correct production
of irregular forms, and a negative correlation to the
production of overregularized forms.
Properties of the verbs that may influence performance
In addition to individual differences in phonological
ability and lexical access across participants, properties
of individual verbs themselves may make them more or
less vulnerable to errors in past tense. Prior research has
shown that past tense performance in native speakers is
influenced by the properties of (i) verb frequency, (ii) the
phoneme ending the present tense verb, (iii) the number
and/or frequency of friends (verbs that form the past tense
in the same way as the target), and (iv) enemies (verbs that
form the past tense in a different way than the target) in a
verb's neighborhood (Cortese, Balota, Sergent-Marshall,
Buckner & Gold, 2006; Marchman, 1997; Marchman,
Wulfeck & Ellis Weismer, 1999). For example, children
are more likely to overregularize irregular verbs that
are low in frequency, and ones that have many regular
neighbors. Children are also more likely to use an
unmarked form rather than a past tense form for both
regular and irregular verbs if the present tense verb
ends in the alveolar stops /t/ or /d/ (Marchman, 1997;
Marchman et al., 1999). Adults with Alzheimer's disease
have difficulty with both regular and irregular verbs if
there are high frequency phonological and orthographic
enemies (Cortese et al., 2006).
In these studies, neighborhoods were defined in terms
of words having different onset, but the same rime -
i.e., a neighborhood of a verb would include all other
verbs that rhyme with it (e.g., the rime neighborhood
of ride would include chide, hide, slide, etc.). However,
in the current study, we also look at another type of
phonological neighborhood. This neighborhood, which

432

Janet L. McDonald and Cristine C. Roussel

we call the vowel neighborhood, consists of all verbs that
have the same onset and coda as the target verb, but which
have a different vowel (e.g., the vowel neighborhood of
ride would include raid, read, rid, etc.). Note that some
of the verbs in a vowel neighborhood may be present
tense verbs (e.g., raid), and some may be past tense
irregular verbs (e.g., rode). If L2 learners are not certain
if a verb is regular or irregular, having other verbs in the
vowel neighborhood, particularly past tense forms, might
tempt L2 learners to use a vowel change (i.e., an irregular
process), and choose one of these vowel neighbors as their
past tense. Note that this will sometimes yield a correct
answer (e.g., ride-rode), but can also yield an incorrect
answer for regular (e.g., raid-read), irregular change
(e.g., ride-read) and irregular no change verbs (e.g.,
rid-read).
Looking at the relationship between various properties
of individual verbs and performance on past tense tasks by
non-native speakers will allow us to see whether factors
known to be influential for native speaking populations
also influence non-native speakers. While the influence
of most of these verb properties has not been examined
in L2 learners, the effect of verb frequency has been.
However, the findings are mixed. Some have not found
frequency effects on regulars but have found them on
irregulars (Birdsong & Flege, 2001), others have found
frequency effects in both verb types (Brovetto & Ullman,
2001, as cited in Ullman, 2006), and others have found no
frequency effects on irregulars (Beck, 1997; Cameli et al.,
2005). It is not clear whether these differences in results
are due to the types of bilinguals tested (across studies
they differ in native language and amount of experience
in English), the actual verbs tested, or some other
factor.
We now turn to Experiment 1, in which native and
non-native English speakers perform tasks measuring
phonological ability, lexical access ability, and past tense
performance - including grammaticality judgment and
production. In general, we predict that the native English
speakers will outperform the non-native English speakers
on all measures. Within the non-native English speakers,
we hypothesize that L2 phonological ability should
correlate positively to performance on regular verbs in
both the grammaticality judgment and production test,
and negatively to unmarked and phonological production
errors across verb types; note that unmarked forms are
the correct answer for irregular no change verbs. L2
lexical access ability should be correlated positively to
performance on irregular verbs on both tasks, and negatively to overregularization errors in production. Within
the L2 speakers, we predict that properties of the verbs
(frequency, endings, and neighborhoods) will also impact
performance; to foreshadow our results, vowel neighborhoods will turn out to be especially influential for L2
learners.

Experiment 1: Non-native English speakers
Method
Participants
Participants were 23 non-native English speaking graduate and undergraduate students (mean age = 26.87, range
19-39 years) at Louisiana State University. The non-native
English speakers came from a variety of first language
backgrounds, including 16 native speakers of Romance
languages (Spanish, Romanian, Portuguese, and French)
and seven native speakers of various other languages
(Russian, Dutch, Arabic, Swahili, and Vietnamese).
Having speakers from different L1 backgrounds should
increase the range of phonological ability (Flege et al.,
1997), but this also means that the specific influences of
the various L1's may add noise to the data.
The non-native speakers' average age of first English
exposure was 9.17 (ranging from 0 to 19 years). The
average age at arrival in the US was 21.56 (ranging
from 2 to 33 years). The average length of residence
in the US was 3.20 years (ranging from 1 month to 17
years). On a five-point Likert scale with 1 meaning poor
and 5 meaning excellent, their subjective evaluation of
their overall English ability was 3.74 (ranging from 2 to
5) and their evaluation of their native language ability
was 4.74 (ranging from 3 to 5). Thus, the sample of
bilinguals selected for this study was heterogeneous on
many characteristics. As noted in the introduction, this
was purposefully done, so the sample would contain a
wide range of linguistic ability, including phonological
ability and lexical access skill.
Fifteen native English speaking undergraduate students
(mean age = 20.07, range 18-23 years) served as a
control group. They were drawn from a pool of students
overwhelmingly from the Southern US; any participant
with Cajun French exposure was eliminated.

Stimuli and procedure
Phonological ability task 1: Gating
This task was used to assess ability to accurately
recognize phonemes given minimal information. After
a practice item (literature), participants were presented
with the initial 100 msec gate of ten different polysyllabic
words (cafeteria, refrigerator, carbohydrate, television,
cauliflower, thermometer, kaleidoscope, vegetable,
caterpillar, and encyclopedia; presentation order was the
same for all), and asked to guess the word. The words had
been recorded by a native English speaker and digitized for
computer presentation. The dependent measure was the
overlap in number of phonemes between the first syllable
of the target word and the first syllable of the word that
the participants guessed at the initial gate. For example,
if the guess at the first gate of cafeteria, was bird, a score

Past tense in non-native speakers and stressed native speakers
of 0 was given. Cup would receive a score of 1, and cat
would receive a score of 2.
Phonological ability task 2: Word pair discrimination
This task assessed the ability to detect the presence or
absence of the /d/ or /t/ phoneme in word final position -
a necessary skill in detecting past tense forms of regular
verbs. Stimuli, taken from Bird et al. (2003), were word
pairs that were identical (coal-coal, cold-cold) or that
differed by a final /d/ or /t/ phoneme (coal-cold, cold-
coal). Across the stimuli, half the time the addition of
the final phoneme formed a new, unrelated word (coal-
cold), half the time it formed a regular past tense form
of the other word (roll-rolled). A total of 128 word pairs,
half identical and half different were presented auditorily.
Participants' responses (i.e., same/different judgment for
same/different pairs) were recorded by pressing a key
on the computer. The dependent measure used was the
average reaction time for correct judgments.
Lexical access ability task: Verb picture naming
This task was used to assess the participants' lexical
ability. The stimuli consisted of 20 black-and-white
drawings depicting verbs (brush, cry, laugh, push, watch,
chase, crawl, kick, wave, comb, drip, scoop, trip, type,
juggle, rake, salute, surf, vacuum, smile; the order was
kept the same for all) taken from the UCSD International
Picture Naming Project corpus (Szekely et al., 2004;
http://crl.ucsd.edu/aszekely/ipnp/). These pictures had
greater than 90% name agreement in native English
speakers, and varied in ln frequency from 0 to 5.5. None
of these verbs were used elsewhere in the experiment.
Participants' task was to correctly name the action
depicted in each drawing with a single verb. The response
to each picture was recorded by the experimenter, and
reaction time from picture onset to naming was recorded
by a voice activated response key on the computer. Several
dependent measures were derived from this task, including
(i) the number of verbs correctly named, (ii) the number
of verbs where no response or a don't know response was
given, and (iii) median reaction time to correct naming.
Past tense grammaticality judgment task
The stimuli for both the grammaticality judgment task
and the verb production task were based on 76 target
and 18 filler verbs. The target verbs consisted of three
classes of items: 31 regular verbs which formed their past
tense by adding the regular -ed ending (e.g., fill-filled), 28
irregular change verbs which formed their past tense by
altering either a vowel or a consonant, or both (e.g., bite-
bit), and 17 irregular no change verbs which had identical
present and past tense forms (e.g., cut-cut). The 18 filler
verbs were all verbs with two possible past tenses (e.g.,
dive-dived/dove). The regular verbs (chew, cry, die, drop,
fail, fill, flow, fry, gain, guess, lay, live, name, pay, play,
pray, pull, seem, sew, show, sigh, slap, spray, stew tie,

433

tow, train, try, use, view, wipe) and irregular change verbs
(bend, bite, bring, build, buy, deal, dig, flee, freeze, grind,
hold, keep, leave, lend, mean, ride, ring, sell, shake, sleep,
slide, speak, steal, stride, swing, teach, win, wind) were
taken from lists in Bird et al. (2003), and the irregular
no change verbs (beat, bet, bid, cost, cut, hit, hurt, put,
quit, rid, set, shed, shut, slit, split, spread, upset) from
Stemberger (2004).
For each verb a grammatical past tense sentence was
formed; all sentences started with the word yesterday
to unambiguously indicate that the verb should be in
the past tense. Then an ungrammatical counterpart of
each grammatical sentence was made as follows: (i) For
regular verbs, the ungrammatical sentence was the same
as the grammatical sentence, except it contained the verb
in its unmarked form (e.g., Yesterday the boy fill the
bucket). Thus, the only difference between grammatical
and ungrammatical sentences for regular verbs was the
presence or absence of the /t/ or /d/ phoneme that marked
regular past. (ii) For irregular change and irregular no
change verbs, the ungrammatical sentence was the same
as the grammatical sentence, except it contained the
overregularized form of the verb (e.g., Yesterday the dog
bited the man or Yesterday the man cutted the paper).
The difference between grammatical and ungrammatical
sentences for irregular verbs was thus more phonologically detectable than that for regular verbs - it involved
differences in vowels, and/or the addition of an extra
syllable /Id/ on the verb. Note that the type of errors used in
the grammaticality judgment task were production errors
frequently made by aphasic speakers who had difficulty
on those verb types (e.g., Ullman et al., 1997, 2005).
For filler verbs, no ungrammatical versions were formed;
rather, participants heard both of the possible past tense
forms (e.g., Yesterday the boy dived into the pool and
Yesterday the boy dove into the pool). Thus, both versions
of the stimuli for the filler sentences were grammatical.
Sentences were recorded by a male native English
speaker and digitized for computer presentation.
Sentences were divided into two blocks. Each verb
appeared once in each block; in one block it was in
its grammatical form and in the other block in its
ungrammatical form. Each block had half the target verbs
in their grammatical form, and half in their ungrammatical
form. The blocks presentation was counterbalanced and
sentence presentation was randomized within each block
for all participants.
Participants were told that they would hear
grammatically correct and incorrect English sentences
and that they were to judge each sentence as grammatically
correct or incorrect by pushing the appropriately marked
key on the computer keyboard. Responses were recorded
by the computer. The dependent measure used was the
A measure using the correctional formulas of Zhang and
Mueller (2005; note that they call their corrected measure

434

Janet L. McDonald and Cristine C. Roussel

of A A), which corrects for bias from guessing by combining hits (correct responses to grammatical sentences)
and false alarms (incorrect responses to ungrammatical
sentences). Perfect discrimination between grammatical
and ungrammatical sentences results in a score of 1,
whereas chance performance results in a score of .5.
Past tense production task
The same verbs used in the grammaticality judgment
task were used in production; note, however, that the
production task actually preceded the grammaticality
judgment task, so that production would not be
contaminated by hearing either the grammatical or
ungrammatical form of a verb during the judgment task.
The present tense form of each verb was recorded by a
female native English speaker and digitized for computer
presentation. A single randomized order of the verbs was
made and used for all participants. Verbs were presented
without sentential context, similar to the method used for
adults by Bybee and Slobin (1982), but without any time
pressure. Participants were asked to say aloud the simple
past tense form for each verb. Each response was written
down by the experimenter on a response sheet.
Production answers were classified into one of seven
categories: (i) The correct past tense form, e.g., rode given
for ride. (ii) A regularized form, e.g., rided given for ride.
Note that giving a regularized form for a regular verb was
the correct answer, so this category did not apply to regular
verbs. (iii) An unmarked form, e.g., ride given for ride.
Note that giving an unmarked form for irregular no change
verbs (e.g., cut for cut) was actually the right answer, so
this category did not apply to that verb type. (iv) A phonologically related error. Here we used strict criteria for
determining phonological relatedness. Only one phoneme
was allowed to differ between (a) the answer and the target
verb - for example, the answer saw differs by one phoneme
from the target verb sew, (b) the answer and the past tense
of the target verb - for example the answer thought differs
by one phoneme from taught the past tense of the target
verb teach, or (c) the present tense of the answer and the
target verb - for example, the answer left comes from the
present tense leave and this differs by one phoneme from
the target verb live, or the answer loved comes from the
present tense love which differs by one phoneme from the
target live. (v) A participle - e.g., giving ridden for ride,
(vi) A don't know or missing answer. (vii) Any answer
not captured in the above categories. The majority of the
answers fell into the first four categories, accounting for
about 97% of the answers given by native and non-native
English speakers alike; thus, only these categories were
analyzed as the dependent measures for this task.
Task order
The experiment was run individually in sessions of up to
45 minutes for native English speaking participants and

60 minutes for non-native English speaking participants.
Order of task administration was the production task, the
gating task, half of the grammaticality judgment task, the
verb picture naming task, the other half of the grammaticality judgment task, and the word pair discrimination
task. Then the participants completed a demographic and
language background questionnaire, wherein they gave
their native and other languages, age at which they had
first been exposed to English, age of arrival in the US,
length of residence in the US, and self-ratings on their
English and native language ability. All tasks except the
questionnaire were computer administered with E-prime
software. Auditory stimuli were played over headphones.
Verb characteristics
Building on past work (Cortese et al., 2006; Marchman,
1997; Marchman et al., 1999), we examined the relationship between verb performance and six specific
characteristics for each verb: (i) The total frequency of
all uninflected and inflected forms of each verb (Francis
& Kucera, 1982) - i.e., the frequency of ride included
all verbal uses of ride, rides, rode, etc. (ii) Whether the
present tense verb ended in the alveolar stops /t/ or /d/.
This distinction was only relevant to our irregular change
verbs, of which approximately one third had an alveolar
ending. The regular verbs we used never ended with /t/ or
/d/, and the irregular no change verbs we used all ended in
/t/ or /d/. (iii) The number of phonological rime neighbors
that were friends of the target verb - i.e., that formed their
past tense in the same way as the target verb. For example,
a friend of ride (rode) is stride (strode). (iv) The number
of phonological rime neighbors that were enemies of the
target verb - i.e., that formed their past tense in a different
way. For example, enemies of ride would be regular verbs
such as side (sided), but also irregular verbs such as slide
(slid), which form their past tense in a different way. (v)
The number of vowel neighbors that were present tense
verbs. For ride this would include raid, read [present
tense], etc. (vi) The number of vowel neighbors that were
past tense irregular verbs. For ride this would include read
[past tense], rode, etc. Neighborhood members were determined by using a combination of the online Washington
University Speech and Hearing Lab neighborhood
database (http://128.252.27.56/Neighborhood/Home.asp)
and the University of Western Australia MRC
Psycholinguistic database (http://www. psy.uwa.edu.au/
mrcdatabase/uwa_mrc.htm). An appendix with these
characteristics for each verb is available on the Journal's
website as Supplementary Materials accompanying the
online version of the present article (see journals.
cambridge.org/bil, vol. 13 (4)).
Results
Typically, non-native speakers are poorer at past tense
than native speakers. To establish this for the current

Past tense in non-native speakers and stressed native speakers

435

Table 1. Performance on the past tense grammaticality judgment and production tasks by native and non-native
English speakers.
Native
speakers
GRAMMATICALITY JUDGMENT (A )
Regular
.87
Irreg. change
.97
Irreg. no change
.96
PRODUCTION (PROPORTION)
Regular
Correct
.94
Regularized
n.a.
Unmarked
.01
Phonological
.02
Irregular change
Correct
.75
Regularized
.11
Unmarked
.05
Phonological
.06
Irregular no change
Correct
.70
Regularized
.24
Unmarked
n.a.
Phonological
.05

Non-native
speakers

p 2

F1 df2

F1

F2 df2

F2

MinF df2

minF

.80
.86
.76

.27
.33
.32

31
29
26

18.16
25.56
25.11

30
27
16

34.41
63.41
58.09

57
48
41

11.89
18.22
17.53

.86
n.a.
.02
.09

.24

34

14.95

30

6.10

52

4.33

--
.32

36
28

0.91
24.11

30
30

1.13
9.27

66
50

0.50
6.70

.66
.17
.07
.06

.08
.03
--
--

36
36
36
36

2.93+
3.09+
1.14
0.12

27
27
27
27

4.35
4.30
1.44
0.26

63
63
63
60

1.75
1.80
0.64
0.08

.66
.21
n.a.
.10

--
--

36
36

0.22
0.12

16
16

1.33
0.68

46
47

0.19
0.10

.18

36

7.88

16

3.83+

32

2.58

n.a. = not applicable
p 2 provided for marginal or significant effects only.
For all analyses the first degree of freedom is 1.
+
p < .10;  p < .05;  p < .01;  p < .001

study, we compared the performance of our non-native
English speakers to that of native English speakers on
both the grammaticality judgment task and the production
task. Both subject and item analyses were performed, and
combined into the min F measure (Clark, 1973). Where
necessary, analyses were corrected for unequal variances
between the groups. We then examined performance
on the phonological ability tasks, and correlated nonnative English speakers' performance on these tasks to
their performance on the grammaticality judgment and
production tasks. Finally, we examined performance on
the picture naming task, and correlated non-native English
speakers' performance on this task to the grammaticality
judgment and production tasks.

Overall performance on grammaticality judgment
and production
As shown in Table 1 (which includes the group means, as
well as partial eta squared, F1 , F2 , and min F statistics),
non-native English speakers had lower grammaticality

judgment scores than native English speakers for all verb
types. They also showed poorer correct production and
more phonological errors than native English speakers
for regular verbs. There was a tendency - marginal
in the subjects analysis and significant in the items -
for non-native English speakers to have poorer correct
production and more overregularizations than native
speakers for irregular change verbs. There was also
a tendency - significant in the subjects analysis and
marginal in the items analysis - for non-native English
speakers to produce more phonological errors than native
speakers on irregular no change verbs. Thus, non-native
English speakers were weaker than native speakers on
past tense tasks for both regular and irregular verbs. The
evidence was strongest in the grammaticality judgment
task, but production also showed deficits.
We had hypothesized that the underlying sources of
weakness in L2 speakers for regular (i.e., L2 phonology)
and irregular (i.e., L2 lexical access) performance differ.
We therefore now turn to analysis of the phonological
ability and lexical access tasks, and look at how they

436

Janet L. McDonald and Cristine C. Roussel

Table 2. Correlations of phonological ability measures and lexical access measures to past tense performance for
non-native English speakers.
Phonological ability
Phoneme
overlap
GRAMMATICALITY JUDGMENT (A )
Regular
.41a+
Irregular change
.31
Irregular no change
.02
PRODUCTION (PROPORTION)
Regular
Correct
Unmarked
Phonological
Irregular change
Correct
Regularized
Unmarked
Phonological
Irregular no change
Correct
Regularized
Phonological
a

Lexical access

Pair
latency
-.52a
.21
-.07



Naming
accuracy
.48

.71
.48

Lack of
response

Naming
latency

-.27
-.46a
-.30a

-.22
-.28
-.22a

-.31
.35
.16

-.18
.26
.03

.44
-.37+
-.29

-.27
.46
.10

.62
-.24

-.56

.25
-.31
-.32
.39+

.23
-.39+
.34
-.15

.62

-.60
-.17
-.13

-.42
.47
.28
-.27

.02
.09
.00
-.30

-.06
.15
-.21

.32
-.32
.00

.49
-.37+
-.37+

-.22
.14
.14

-.08
.01
.02



significant for grammatical sentences p < .05
p < .10;  p < .05;  p < .01;  p < .001

+

correlate with regular and irregular performance in the
non-native English speakers.

Phonological ability
On the first measure of phonological ability, overlap in
phonemes between the target word and guess at the initial
gate of a word, non-native English speakers (M = 1.53)
somewhat surprisingly did not differ from native English
speakers (M = 1.62), F(1,36) = .80, ns. Note here that
a higher score means better phonological ability. The
groups also did not differ in the accuracy on the word
pair measure (non-native speakers M = 94.9%, native
speakers M = 93.4%), F(1,36) = .54, ns, but did on the
measure of interest on this task - the latency to judge
the word pairs (non-native speakers M = 1790 msec,
native speakers M = 1623 msec), F(1,36) = 5.96, p < .05,
p 2 = .12. Note here that a higher reaction time denotes
poorer phonological ability. To see if phoneme overlap
and word pair latencies were related, we computed their
correlation. They were not significantly correlated, r =
-.33, ns; however, removal of the participant with an
outlying reaction time (> 2 standard deviations above the

mean) caused the correlation to become significant, r =
-.48, p < .05.
Phonological measures for non-native English
speakers were predicted to correlate with performance
on regular verbs on the grammaticality judgment and
production tasks, and to production of phonological
and unmarked forms for all verb types. A correlation
to unmarked forms means that phonological measures
may also correlate with production of the correct (i.e.,
unmarked) form of no change verbs such as cut. As shown
in Table 2, the phoneme match at initial gate in the gating
task had a marginal positive correlation (p < .06) with
the A for regular verbs in the grammaticality judgment
task. Further investigation showed that when grammatical
and ungrammatical sentences were analyzed separately,
the correlation was significant for grammatical sentences
(r = .42, p < .05), but not for ungrammatical sentences
(r = .14, ns). Thus, non-native English speakers with good
phonological overlap in their initial guess on the gating
task were more likely to accept grammatical regular past
tenses (filled) as correct. Similar results were found for
the word pair discrimination latency measure. There was a
significant negative correlation (as high latencies signify

Past tense in non-native speakers and stressed native speakers
slower discrimination) with A performance for regular
verbs, and further investigation showed this relationship
to be significant for grammatical sentences (r = -.48,
p < .05), but not for ungrammatical sentences (r =
-.32, ns). As predicted, the phonological measures were
not correlated with performance on either type of irregular
verb in the grammaticality judgment task.
On the production task, gating task performance
showed a positive correlation to the production of
correct regular forms, and a marginal negative one
to production of unmarked regular verbs. The other
measure of phonological ability, word pair discrimination
latency, correlated significantly with the production of
unmarked forms for regular verbs. The phonological
ability measures were also predicted to correlate with
production of unmarked forms for irregular change
verbs and for irregular no change verbs - in the latter
case this corresponds to the correct form. Although
the correlations with either measure did not reach
significance, the directions of the correlations were as
expected - people with higher gating scores made fewer
unmarked responses (negative correlation), and people
with faster reaction times made fewer unmarked responses
(positive correlation). Phonological measures were also
predicted to correlate with phonological errors, but there
was little evidence for this. Indeed, only the gating
score marginally correlated with phonological errors
for irregular change verbs, but this in the opposite
direction from the prediction. That is, people with poor
phonological ability were LESS likely to make this type
of error. This result hints that phonological errors, or
lack thereof, may be determined by some other factor.
We will return to this issue when we look at verb level
factors than influence phonological errors on each verb
type.
Lexical access ability
Production of target picture names in non-native English
speakers (M = .72) was significantly worse than that of
native English speakers (M = .94), F(1,27) = 29.31, p <
.001, p 2 = .36. When both non-native and native English
speakers were unable to give the target word, they almost
always gave a synonym or a word that was somehow
related to the picture (e.g., football for a picture of a person
kicking a football); however, words given by the nonnative English speakers were sometimes more general
than the target word (e.g., play for juggle). Non-native
English speakers were unable to supply any response for
3% of the pictures, which was significantly greater than
that of the native speakers (M = 0%), F(1,22) = 11.73,
p < .005, p 2 = .17. Non-native English speakers (M =
1524 msec) were also slower than native English speakers
(M = 1161 msec) to correctly name the pictures, F(1,36) =
2.80, p < .01, p 2 = .18. The lack of response measure
of lexical access was generally correlated with the other

437

lexical access measures (lack of response-picture naming,
r = -.40, p < .06; lack of response-latency, r = .64, p <
.001), while correct picture naming accuracy and latency
were not correlated (r = -.23, ns).
Lexical access measures from the picture naming task
for the non-native English speakers were predicted to
correlate with both change and no change irregular verb
performance, and to relate to overregularization of these
verbs. As shown in Table 2, correct picture naming
correlated with many aspects of task performance across
all verb types and tasks - i.e., non-native English speakers
with larger vocabularies did better on regulars as well
as irregulars. Thus, this measure failed to give us the
discrimination we wished to see; perhaps it is too general
a measure to capture the nature of difficulties with lexical
access that may cause problems for L2 learners. This
measure does not give L2 learners credit for being able to
come up with a synonym, which indicates some success
in accessing the relevant concept. However, the second
measure - lack of response, which does reflect being truly
stymied in access, did show correlations more specific to
irregular verbs. It correlated significantly to A scores
on the grammaticality judgments of irregular change
verbs. Further investigation showed this was specific
to grammatical sentences (r = .52, p < .05) and not
ungrammatical sentences (r = .15, ns). While lack of
response failed to correlate with A scores for irregular no
change verbs, it was significant for grammatical sentences
(r = .44, p < .05), and not for ungrammatical (r = .26, ns).
Additional support for lexical access effects was found in
the third measure - median correct picture naming. This
measure was significantly correlated with performance on
grammatical sentences (r = -.54, p < .01) for irregular
no change verbs. Thus, non-native English speakers with
good vocabularies and quicker lexical access were better
able to correctly accept irregular forms.
On the production task, lack of response significantly
correlated with the production of correct irregular change
verbs and to overregularization of these verbs. However,
it failed to significantly correlate on the same forms for
irregular no change verbs, but the correlations were in the
expected direction.
Correlations of verb characteristics with non-native
English speakers' performance
In this section we examine the correlations between the
six properties of the individual verbs we had measured
(frequency, /t/ or /d/ ending, rime neighborhood friends,
rime neighborhood enemies, vowel neighborhood present
tense verbs, and vowel neighborhood past tense irregular
verbs) and performance by the non-native English
speakers on the grammaticality judgment and production
tasks (see part (a) of Table 3). Consistent with previous
research in native English speakers (Marchman, 1997;

438

Janet L. McDonald and Cristine C. Roussel
Table 3. Correlations between verb characteristics and performance by non-native English speakers.
Grammaticality

Production

judgment
Correct
(a)
Regular verbs
Frequency
.08
.15
Rime friend
-.06
.17
Rime enemy
.13
-.26
Present vowel
-.23
-.52

Past vowel
-.41
-.71
Irregular change verbs

.51
Frequency
.60

/d/ or /t/ ending
-.45
-.49
Rime friend
-.27
-.21
Rime enemy
.29
.20
Present vowel
.17
.37+
Past vowel
-.16
-.32
Irregular no change verbs
.61
Frequency
.53
Rime friend
-.13
-.11
Rime enemy
-.15
.25
Present vowel
.18
.30
Past vowel
-.17
-.06
(b)
Irregular change verbs - past tense not in vowel neighborhood
.61
Frequency
.73
/d/ or /t/ ending
-.41
-.42
Rime friend
-.32
-.08
Rime enemy
-.04
-.20
Present vowel
-.07
.01
-.68
Past vowel
-.78
Irregular change verbs - past tense in vowel neighborhood
Frequency
.42
.20
-.46+
/d/ or /t/ ending
-.47+
Rime friend
-.23
-.35

Rime enemy
.63
.59
Present vowel
.35
.56
+
Past vowel
.45
.47+

Regular

Unmarked

Phonological

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

-.22
.06
.47
.29
.48

-.10
-.20
.20
.50

.68

-.46
.35+
.13
-.07
-.37+
.14

-.29

.75
-.07
-.45
-.29
.26

-.27
-.02
.39
-.05
-.24
.32+

-.53
.15
.04
-.38
-.48+

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

-.28
-.06
-.33
-.10
.38

-.66
.44
.21
.34
-.03
.58

-.50+
.63
-.12
-.23
-.25
.66

-.27
-.04
-.14
.16
-.01
.54+

-.16
.23
.08
-.35
-.53
-.54

.09

.83
-.04
-.65
-.27
-.07

-.11
-.15
.72
-.18
-.25
-.09

n.a. = not applicable
+
p < .10;  p < .05;  p < .01;  p < .001

Marchman et al., 1999), we found that verb frequency
had no relationship to performance with regular verbs,
but did correlate with performance on irregular change
and no change verbs. Non-native English speakers were
less likely to make correct grammaticality judgments and
give the correct irregular past tense for low frequency
verbs, and they were more likely to overregularize these

forms. These findings echo those of Birdsong and Flege
(2001) but were different from some others who have
examined L2 speakers (Beck, 1997; Brovetto & Ullman,
2001, as cited in Ullman, 2006; Cameli et al., 2005).
Also consistent with previous research with native English
speakers (Marchman, 1997; Marchman et al., 1999), nonnative speakers showed a correlation between the /t/ or /d/

Past tense in non-native speakers and stressed native speakers
ending and production of unmarked forms for irregular
change verbs. However, contrary to previous research
with native English speakers (Cortese et al., 2006), we
did not find an effect of rime friends or enemies on
correct grammaticality judgment or correct production
for any verb type. Rime friends showed a correlation only
to phonological errors for irregular change verbs, while
rime enemies showed significant correlations to unmarked
form production but these were opposite in direction for
the regular and irregular change verbs.
However, there was strong evidence that a different
type of neighborhood, that of the vowel, was strongly
influential for non-native English speakers. First, the
number of present and past vowel neighbors showed
strong correlations to performance by non-native English
speakers for regular verbs. Consider the correlations for
present tense vowel neighbors. Target regular verbs having
many such neighbors were less likely to be produced
correctly, and more likely resulted in a phonologically
related error. This indicates that the non-native English
speakers may have misheard the original verb, and then
given the past tense of the misheard verb. Indeed, an
examination of the errors made by the non-native English
speakers showed that they often gave left as the past tense
of live, indicating they may have misheard the target verb
as leave. They also often gave felt as the past tense of
fill, indicating that they heard the original verb as feel.
(Note that both of these errors are consistent with the
/I/-/i/ confusion many speakers of Romance and other
languages have in English.)
Now consider the correlations for regular verbs for
past tense vowel neighbors. Having a large number of
past tense neighbors correlated with low grammaticality
judgment scores, production of fewer correct forms, and
more unmarked forms and phonological errors. An examination of the type of phonological errors given showed
that non-native English speakers indeed often gave an
irregular past tense vowel neighbor rather than the correct
regular form - for example, flew was often given as the
past tense of flow, rather than flowed. This pattern suggests
that having an attractive past tense form in the vowel
neighborhood confused non-native English speakers, and
since it was a plausible answer (it was past tense, and it
had strong phonological resemblance to the target verb),
they occasionally produced it.
If non-native English speakers are indeed attracted
to past tense forms in the vowel neighborhood of a
target verb, this has different implications for regular
verbs (such a past vowel neighbor will always be wrong,
and always result in a phonologically related error)
and irregular change verbs (such a past tense vowel
neighbor may actually be right, and would result in a
decrease in phonologically related errors - something that
may explain the previously mentioned tendency of low
phonological ability non-native English speakers to make

439

fewer phonologically related errors - see Table 2). To test
this idea, however, we need to break down our irregular
change verbs into two classes: (i) those that do not have
their correct past tense in their vowel neighborhood - this
includes verbs such as bend, build, deal, etc., which have
a consonant change or addition in addition to any vowel
change, and (ii) those that do have their correct past tense
in their vowel neighborhood - this includes verbs such
as hold, ride, speak, etc. The former class should show
similar effects of past vowel neighbors as regular verbs,
while the latter class should not. The correlations for these
two subclasses of irregular change verbs are shown in part
(b) of Table 3.
Note that, as predicted, for irregular change verbs
that did not have the correct past tense in their vowel
neighborhood, the size of the past vowel neighborhood
was correlated with poor grammaticality judgment and
low correct production. It was also correlated with more
regularization, and with more unmarked forms; there was
also a marginal correlation with phonologically related
forms. As an example of the latter type of error, nonnative English speakers gave flew as the past tense of flee.
For irregular change verbs that did have the correct
past tense in their vowel neighborhood, we did not find
these same correlations - in fact, they were generally
in the opposite direction. There were marginal positive
correlations of past vowel neighborhoods with correct
grammaticality judgments and correct production and
significant negative correlation with overregularization.
That is, for this type of irregular verb, having past tense
vowel neighbors was found to be beneficial, probably
because one of the neighbors is actually the correct past
tense. For this subclass of verb there was no correlation
between past vowel neighborhood size and production of
phonologically related errors. Rather, this type of error
was strongly correlated with the number of rime friends.
And errors for this type of verb were consonant with
this - for example, slung was given as the past tense of
swing, indicating that it was misheard as sling, and brought
was given as the past tense of ring, indicating that it was
misheard as bring.
Discussion
Experiment 1 showed that non-native English speakers
were worse than native English speakers in their
mastery of both regular and irregular past tense. It
further showed that different factors were related to
poor performance on regular and irregular past tense.
Poor phonological ability corresponded to inaccurate
regular past tense performance, and higher production
of unmarked forms for regulars. The lexical access
measure of lack of response on the picture naming task
correlated with poor irregular past tense performance,
and overregularization. Verb characteristics were also

440

Janet L. McDonald and Cristine C. Roussel

significant: frequency effects were found for irregular
verbs, and more interestingly, a new type of vowel centered
neighborhood (i.e., containing present or past tense vowel
neighbors), proved to be highly influential for non-native
English speakers. Verbs with other present tense verbs
in their vowel neighborhood could be plausibly misheard
as another verb (e.g., live perceived as leave), due to the
increased competition non-native English speakers have
in word recognition because of problems in phoneme
discrimination (Weber & Cutler, 2004). Verbs with past
tense verbs in their vowel neighborhood had a plausible
phonologically related irregular form available, tempting
non-native English speakers to irregularize both regular
(flow-flew) and some irregular (flee-flew) verbs, while
actually promoting correct answers for irregular verbs
with the correct past form in the vowel neighborhood
(fly-flew).
The influence of the vowel neighborhoods indicates
that the type of phonological difficulty L2 learners have -
discriminating L2 phonological categories - seems to hit
vowels particularly hard. Since our sample was largely
comprised of speakers of Romance languages, this was
perhaps not surprising. Romance languages generally
have fewer vowels than English (e.g., Spanish has five
vowel phonemes, Romanian has seven, and most dialects
of English have 15). Romance language speakers learning
English thus have to take their fewer vowel distinctions
and use them to perceive and produce the more numerous
English vowels. This results in many English vowel
confusions - for example, Romance language speakers
have trouble distinguishing /I/ and /i/, as well as other
English vowel pairs (Flege & MacKay, 2004; Fox, Flege
& Munro, 1995). However, even the native speakers of
non-Romance languages in our current sample showed
the same difficulties with vowel perception in our current
study: six of the seven non-Romance speakers showed
errors on regular verbs due to present or past tense
vowel neighbors, a ratio very similar to the 14 out of
16 Romance speakers who showed the same trend. Even
the native English speakers in our sample showed some
influence of vowel neighborhoods on their behavior. They
showed positive correlations between the production of
phonologically related incorrect past tense forms for
regular verbs and both present tense (r = .38, p < .05)
and past tense vowel neighbors (r = .37, p < .05). These
correlations were smaller in magnitude (and significantly
so for past tense neighbors, t(28) = 3.21, p < .005)
than those for non-native English speakers, but showed
that native English speakers were also attracted to vowel
neighbors. Some of this attraction may also be helped
along by the influence of irregular verb patterns. For
example, giving flew as the past tense of flow is probably
aided by the blow-blew irregular verb pattern. However,
at least some of the past tense forms from the vowel
neighborhood that were given appear not to be driven

by irregular patterns (e.g., saw as the past tense of
sew).
Previous work using impaired native speaking
populations has often failed to find a correlation
between simple phonological measures, such as word
pair discrimination and regular past tense performance -
often measured by a production task (Lambon Ralph
et al., 2005; Tyler et al., 2002b). However, we were
able to find this relationship using an L2 population.
Note, however, that our strongest correlation for the
word pair discrimination task occurs for regulars in the
grammaticality judgment task. The discrimination needed
for regulars in the grammaticality judgment task (fill-
filled) is parallel to that in the word pair discrimination
measure (coal-cold), making it therefore more likely to
find a correlation with the grammaticality judgment than
production task.
Previous work on past tense in L2 speakers has
usually found that this population has more difficulty with
irregular than regular past tense (Basnight-Brown et al.,
2007; Birdsong & Flege, 2001; Cameli et al., 2005). We
find a similar trend in our production task (F(2,44) =
13.51, p < .001). But we should not conclude that
irregulars are harder than regulars for non-native English
speakers. First, note that native English speakers also
show this same pattern - they also find regulars easier
to produce than irregulars. Second, if a different task is
used, a different pattern can result. We used the same
verbs in the grammaticality judgment as in the production
task, but in the former task, non-native English speakers
actually found irregular change verbs to be easier than the
other two types (F(2,44) = 5.52, p < .01). Thus, task type
might be highly influential in determining which verbs are
disadvantaged.
Experiment 2: Stressed native English speakers
Experiment 1 demonstrated that L2 phonological ability
correlated with regular past tense performance, while
L2 lexical access correlated with irregular past tense
performance in non-native English speakers. However,
such correlations say nothing about causation. We
therefore turn to native English speakers, who have
native mastery of past tense formation, and look to
see if impairing their phonological ability selectively
impacts regular past tense performance, and if impairing
their lexical access ability selectively impacts irregular
past tense performance. Such a demonstration would
provide evidence for a causal link - showing that nonnative speakers' deficits in syntactic performance can
be simulated in native speakers by causing deficits
in non-syntactic processing. Imposing such processing
stress manipulations on unimpaired speakers has been
successful in modeling performance on grammatical
tasks by such diverse groups as aphasics (Blackwell

Past tense in non-native speakers and stressed native speakers
& Bates, 1995; Dick, Bates & Ferstl, 2003; Dick,
Bates, Wulfeck, Utman, Dronkers & Gernsbacher, 2001;
Miyake, Carpenter & Just, 1996), and children with
specific language impairment (Hayiou-Thomas, Bishop
& Plunkett, 2004) as well as late L2 learners (McDonald,
2006).
In order to simulate the phonological weakness seen
in L2 learners, we needed to put native speakers under
perceptual stress that made it difficult to accurately
process phonology. We did this by adding an overlay of
white noise to the stimuli, which should make it more
difficult to distinguish what was being heard. This should
result in more errors in grammaticality judgment on
regular verbs than irregular verbs, because the distinction
in the former case is more subtle than in the latter. There
may also be more production errors for regular than
irregular verbs, and a greater number of phonological
errors in general. However, since noise was added across
the whole verb length, the nature of these phonological
errors may not show the vowel centric focus we had
observed in the L2 learners.
In order to simulate problems with lexical access as
seen in the L2 learners, we placed the native speakers
under time pressure by giving them a short response
deadline. This may not enable them to complete lexical
access before they are forced to respond. Inadequate time
to complete lexical access should result in more errors in
grammaticality judgment on irregular than regular verbs,
with people accepting the overregularized forms of the
irregular verbs. There should also be more production
errors on irregular than regular verbs, with many errors
being overregularized forms.
Method
Participants
Forty-five adult native English speakers participated in
Experiment 2. Fifteen were the native English speakers
from Experiment 1; they served as an unstressed control
group here. Fifteen were in the noise condition (mean
age = 24.33, range 18-56 years), and 15 were in the
deadline condition (mean age = 20.60, range 18-
26 years). All native English speakers were current
undergraduate students and received course credit for their
participation.
Stimuli and procedure
The materials and procedures used were identical with
those used in Experiment 1 except for the administration
of the grammaticality judgment and past tense production
tasks, which were presented with an appropriate stress
manipulation. In the noise stress group, the stimuli were
heard through a layer of white noise. Pilot testing led to
a selection of noise level where stimuli were noticeably
harder, but not impossible to perceive. This chosen noise

441

level was kept constant across tasks and participants. In
the deadline condition, the stress manipulation involved
a 1000 msec response deadline after stimulus offset. This
was signaled by a ding; participants were instructed to give
their response (i.e., push the button in the grammaticality
judgment task, or say the past tense of the verb in the
production task) before the ding occurred. Participants'
responses were still recorded if they occurred after the
deadline, but they were urged to respond faster.
Results
We analyzed the data by comparing each stressed group
to the control group. Both subject and item analyses were
performed, and combined into the min F measure.
Grammaticality judgment
The noise manipulation was predicted to selectively
impact regular verbs. As shown in Table 4, this is exactly
what happened. Adding noise impacted the ability of
native English speakers to hear the difference between past
tense regular verbs and their unmarked form (a difference
of a /t/ or /d/), but did not impact their ability to hear the
difference between past tense irregular verbs, and their
overregularized form (a difference of a vowel contrast
and/or syllabic /Id/).
The deadline group was predicted to have selective
impairment on irregular verbs. As shown in Table 4, they
differed from the control on the judgment of irregular
change verbs, but failed to do so for the irregular no
change verbs. As predicted, they did not differ from the
control on regular verbs.
Thus, on the grammaticality judgment task we were
able to mimic what we found in the non-native English
speakers. Noise stress selectively impacted regular verbs,
while leaving irregular verbs unharmed. Simple deadline
pressure selectively impacted irregular verbs (or at least
irregular change verbs), while leaving regular verb
performance intact.
Production
Compared to the control group, the noise stress group
was predicted to have lower correct production of regular
verbs, and have a greater number of phonologically related
errors in general. As shown in Table 4, the noise stress
group showed a general decrement of correct production
across all verb types. They also showed corresponding
increases in phonological errors across all verb types. All
effects that were marginal in the min F analysis were
significant in subjects analysis and significant or marginal
in the items analyses (correct production of irregular no
change verbs, F1(1,56) = 5.60, p < .05; F2(1,16) =
10.48, p < .01; phonological errors for irregular change
verbs, F1(1,56) = 16.90, p < .001; F2(1,27) = 4.05, p =
.05; phonological errors for irregular no change verbs,

.93
n.a.
.03
.02
.64
.17
.07
.06
.61
.25
n.a.
.05

.59
.08
.03
.13
.48
.13
n.a.
.15

.86
.94
.94

Deadline

.69
n.a.
.01
.15

.78
.95
.95

Noise

n.a. = not applicable
p 2 provided for marginal or significant effects only.
For all analyses the first degree of freedom is 1.
+p < .10;  p < .05;  p < .01;  p < .001

PRODUCTION (PROPORTION)
Regular
Correct
.94
Regularized
n.a.
Unmarked
.01
Phonological
.02
Irregular change
Correct
.75
Regularized
.11
Unmarked
.05
Phonological
.06
Irregular no change
Correct
.70
Regularized
.24
Unmarked
n.a.
Phonological
.05

GRAMMATICALITY JUDGMENT (A )
Regular
.87
Irreg. change
.97
Irreg. no change
.96

Control

66
68
20

.22
--
.42

76
70
82
40

72
38

--
.71
.41
--
--
.35

46

59
72
50

MinF df2

.81

.72
--
--

p 2

Control vs. Noise

--
--
.17
--
--
--
--
--
--

6.49
0.56
0.42
3.27+
3.65+
1.38
3.09+

--

--
.14
--

p 2

0.09
11.49



21.52



20.73
1.40
0.01

minF

50

69
68

79
78
81
83

86
75

83

84
81
39

MinF df2

Control vs. Deadline

Table 4. Performance on the past tense grammaticality judgment and production tasks by unstressed and stressed native English
speakers.

0.02

0.74
0.03

4.43
1.95
0.62
0.06

1.72
0.02

0.27

0.11
4.23
0.13

minF

442
Janet L. McDonald and Cristine C. Roussel

Past tense in non-native speakers and stressed native speakers
Table 5. Percent phonological errors by verb type and
location for unstressed native, non-native and noise
stressed native English speakers.

Regular
Onset
Vowel
Coda
Irregular change
Onset
Vowel
Coda
Irregular no change
Onset
Vowel
Coda

Control

Non-native
speaker

Noise

0 .22a
1.51a
0.22a

1.12a
7.01b
1.12a

11.61b
1.72a
1.51a

1.67a
3.33ab
0.71a

1.55a
3.88b
0.93a

10.95b
1.19a
0.95a

0.39a
3.53a
0.78a

0.26a
8.95b
0.77a

7.45b
2.35a
4.71b

Note: Different superscripts indicate that means on a line are
different by a Tukey post-hoc test.

443

noise to the signal caused native English speakers to have
trouble with the perception of onsets.
When compared to the control group, the deadline
group was predicted to have lower correct production
of irregular verbs, and to show higher rates of
overregularization. As shown in Table 4, the deadline
group did indeed show significantly lower correct
production of irregular change verbs. They also had lower
rates of correct production for irregular no change verbs,
but this difference failed to reach significance in the
subjects analyses (F1(1,56) = .85, ns) although it did in the
items analysis (F2(1,16) = 5.59, p < .05). As predicted,
correct production of regular verbs was not impacted by
deadline pressure. There was a numerical tendency for this
group to produce more overregularized forms for irregular
change verbs, but it was not statistically significant. A
comparison of the deadline group's performance on the
irregular change and no change verbs to that shown by
the L2 learners in Table 1 shows extremely close parallels
in the magnitude of performance across the correct and
various error categories.
Discussion

F1(1,56) = 29.64, p < .001; F2(1,16) = 3.45, p < .09).
Thus, the noise manipulation failed to selectively impair
the production of regular verbs. As discussed below, this
was because the nature of the phonological errors made
by the noise stress group was different from the type made
by non-native English speakers in Experiment 1, and thus
impacted all verb types.
We examined the nature of the phonological errors
made by the noise group, by comparing it both to
the control native English speakers, and the non-native
English speakers from Experiment 1. Table 5 breaks down
phonological errors by the location of the error. Onset
errors involved mishearing the target word's onset - such
as giving tried as the past tense of fry or said as the
past tense of pay. Vowel errors involved mishearing the
target's word vowel, or replacing that vowel with another
when giving the past tense. For example, giving slipped
as the past tense of slap or flew as the past tense of flow.
Coda errors involved mishearing or missing the end of a
word - for example, giving gave as the past tense of gain
or saw as the past tense of seem. A three-way ANOVA on
group, verb type and location yielded a significant threeway interaction, F(8,200) = 3.51, p < .001. Tukey followup tests after one-way ANOVAs on group by each verb
type and location showed that while non-native English
speakers had high rates of phonological errors involving
vowels, native English speakers under noise made more
errors on onsets for all verb types, as well as on codas for
irregular no change verbs. Thus, while non-native English
speakers had trouble with the perception of vowels, adding

The purpose of Experiment 2 was to show that a stress
manipulation that made phonological processing more
difficult would impact regular, but not irregular past
tense. In addition, a stress manipulation that made lexical
access more difficult would impact irregular, but not
regular past tense. This would allow us to make a
causal connection between these non-syntactic processes
and morphosyntactic performance. The results of the
grammaticality judgment task provided support for these
hypotheses. Noise stress impacted regulars, but did not
impact irregular verbs. The overlay of noise across
the sentence made the subtle discrimination needed for
regulars (fill-filled) more difficult, but had less impact
on the more perceptible contrast present for irregulars
(bit-bited, cut-cutted). Deadline pressure did not impact
regulars, but did impact irregular change verbs.
In the production task, the noise manipulation failed
to be specific to regular verbs. Further analysis showed
this was because added noise strongly impacted the
perception of verb onsets, which led to phonological
errors across all verb types. Non-native English speakers
with phonological difficulties in Experiment 1 showed
attraction to present or past tense verbs in the vowel
neighborhood, which resulted in more errors on regular
verbs. Thus, adding a uniform amount of noise to the verb
might not be the best simulation of the phonological deficit
suffered by L2 learners in production; rather, adding noise
specifically to the vowel portion might be a better way to
model this deficit.
The lexical access time manipulation did succeed in
having the desired effect in the production task. Poor

444

Janet L. McDonald and Cristine C. Roussel

correct performance on irregular change verbs with
intact regular performance was achieved in the deadline
condition.
It is important to emphasize that the native English
speakers in Experiment 2 obviously have native command
of English past tense. Yet, their past tense performance was
impaired in specific ways when non-syntactic processes
were disturbed. Thus, it is possible that poor syntactic
performance can be the result of specific non-syntactic
problems. The current study adds to studies that have used
intact native speakers under processing stress as a method
of modeling difficulties experienced by other populations
(Blackwell & Bates, 1995; Dick et al., 2001; Dick et al.,
2003; Hayiou-Thomas et al., 2004; McDonald, 2006;
Miyake et al., 1996). This method is particularly useful in
testing what aspect of processing (e.g., processing time,
phonological ability, memory capacity, etc.) may underlie
the particular syntactic deficit.
General discussion
Why do non-native English speakers have trouble with L2
morphosyntax? Do they lack the underlying knowledge
(Meisel, 1997), or do they have knowledge that they are
unable to consistently apply or demonstrate (Prevost &
White, 2000)? Perhaps there is a combination of both. For
example, if a learner has never or rarely encountered the
past tense of a low frequency irregular verb such as stride-
strode, this knowledge would be absent. However, there
may be other relevant past tense knowledge or processes
that the learner possesses, but is not able to access at
a particular time, or on a particular task (see Johnson,
Shenkman, Newport & Medin, 1996 for a relevant model
of L2 grammaticality judgment performance). Reasons
for this variable accessibility may lie with high processing
or working memory demands, inadequate time to access
the more weakly represented L2 information, or problems
with the processing of linguistic information that must be
completed as an input for syntactic analysis. The fact that
we were able to largely induce similar profiles of problems
that L2 speakers show with past tense performance by
placing native English speakers under various types of
processing stress gives at least an existence proof that
impaired performance can occur in the presence of full
syntactic knowledge.
The ability to simulate the deficits of any atypical
group (aphasics, language impaired, L2 learners) by
putting native speakers under stress (see also Dick et al.,
2001; Hayiou-Thomas et al., 2004; McDonald, 2006) has
implications for models of syntactic processing. Problems
with syntax in such atypical populations are often used as
evidence for a domain specific, modular syntax processing
mechanism that has suffered neurological damage or for
a biologically based age limitation specific to syntax
acquisition (Lenneberg, 1967; Pinker, 1994). However,

simulation of these problems in intact native speakers
is consistent with the opposing viewpoint that syntax
is a non-modular system, and open to the influences of
other cognitive processes. Such an approach also allows
the same processing architecture for typical and various
atypical populations; what may differ between these
populations is the type of underlying or basic cognitive
process that is impaired.
The results of the current experiments also show that
morphosyntactic difficulty may have different sources for
different morphemes, or in this case, different forms of
the same morpheme - regular and irregular past tense.
Further evidence across other morphemes indicates that
this is probably generally true. For example, in native
speaking children, working memory capacity has been
shown to be important in grammaticality judgments for
third person agreement, but not for plurals. Similarly, in
this same group, phonological ability has been shown to be
relevant to grammaticality judgment for single phoneme
realizations of regular plurals (e.g., flute-flutes) and third
person agreement (e.g., jump-jumps), but not for syllabic
realizations of the same morphemes (e.g., plural: glass-
glasses; agreement: watch-watches) (McDonald, 2008).
Similarly, the poor mastery that L2 speakers often show for
L2 morphosyntax may have different underlying sources
for different morphemes. Depending on the profile of
strengths and weaknesses of an individual learner on
various non-syntactic aspects of the second language such
as L2 phonology, L2 working memory capacity, and L2
access speed, different patterns of difficulty across L2
morphemes may occur.
A new type of neighborhood was shown to be
influential in the past tense production performance for
non-native English speakers, as well as native English
speakers. Vowel neighborhoods were especially influential
for the production of phonologically related errors.
Having a plausible vowel-change irregular form in the
neighborhood made it an attractive alternative. These
types of phonological errors are different in nature than
the type often reported for native English speakers with
phonological impairments. Such impaired populations
tend to make simplification errors of consonant clusters
(e.g., tane for trained). Thus, it appears that the nature of
the phonological impairment for L2 learners is centered
on the correct perception of L2 phonemes, particularly
vowels, while it is more of a production deficit for at least
some impaired populations.
Across both the grammaticality judgment and
production tasks and in both experiments, predicted
differences that occurred for irregular change verbs
were often not significant for irregular no change verbs,
although means were generally in the same direction.
This may partly be due to the fact that there were fewer
verbs in this latter category, giving less power to the items
analyses. However, these two subclasses of irregular verbs

Past tense in non-native speakers and stressed native speakers
may have somewhat different properties. For example,
irregular no change verbs actually benefit if phonological
limitations favor the production of unmarked forms, while
irregular change verbs would be disadvantaged. Similarly,
the tendency for unmarked forms to be given to verbs
with a /d/ or /t/ final phoneme would promote correct (i.e.,
unmarked) answers for our no change verbs as all ended
in /d/ or /t/, while promoting incorrect answers for those
change verbs (36% of our sample) that ended in /d/ or /t/.
The past tense debate
As noted in the introduction, there are two theoretical
positions that attempt to explain the data on past tense
performance. One group maintains that regulars are
formed by a productive rule, while irregulars are formed
by lexical look up in declarative memory, or through
an associative network (Pinker, 1999; Pinker & Ullman,
2002). This theory predicts a double dissociation between
regular and irregular past tense performance. When a
person has an impairment of the parts of the brain
involved with grammar (i.e., the `rules' part of the model,
associated with left anterior damage), regular past tense is
affected, and irregular past is intact. When a person has an
impairment of lexical memory (i.e., the `words' part of the
model, associated with left posterior damage), irregular
past tense is affected, leaving regular past tense intact
(Pinker & Ullman, 2002). This model does not predict a
connection between phonological ability and regular past
tense; it does predict a connection between lexical access
and irregular past tense.
A second group maintains that regular and irregular
past tenses are formed by a single associative mechanism.
Connectionist models actualize this by associating the
phonological form of regular and irregular verbs with their
corresponding past tense forms and meaning (Joanisse
& Seidenberg, 1999; McClelland & Patterson, 2002;
Rumelhart & McClelland, 1986). According to this single
process model, phonology is more associated with the
formation of regular past tense, because of the high
phonological overlap between regular present and past
tense forms, while semantics is more important for the
linkage between present and past tense forms for irregular
verbs. Indeed, a connectionist simulation of the single
process model found that when severe phonological
damage and random noise were added to the model,
regulars were more severely impacted than irregulars.
When semantic units were lesioned, irregular past tense
showed a marked decrease in accuracy, while regulars
were only slightly impacted (Joanisse & Seidenberg,
1999). Thus, single mechanism accounts specifically
predict that individual differences in factors such as
phonological ability or strength of semantic representation
should differentially impact regular and irregular verbs,
respectively.

445

Congruent with both models, the current experiments
do show that different factors impact the processing
of regulars and irregulars. However, only the single
process model predicts a relationship between phonology
and regulars - because of the different phonological
characteristics of the regular vs. irregular verbs, not
because of the nature of the syntactic subclasses. In
general, many characteristics - phonological complexity
(Bird et al., 2003), phonological regularity (Burzio, 2002),
phonological rime neighborhoods (Cortese et al., 2006),
semantic neighborhood density (Baayen & Moscoso del
Prado Martin, 2005) - are confounded in lists of irregular
and regular verbs used in studies investigating past tense
formation, and removing these confounds often changes
performance, leveling differences between regular and
irregular verbs (Bird et al., 2003).
We find a similar situation in our data. L2 learners in
Experiment 1 show a relationship between phonological
ability and regular performance, but it is due to the
difference in phonological characteristics between regular
and irregular verbs. In the grammaticality judgment task,
regulars contained a more subtle contrast (fill-filled)
than the irregular (bit-bited), thus putting more demands
on phonological processing. In the production task, the
vowel neighborhoods of regular verbs never contained
the correct past tense form, while they often did for
irregular verbs, causing this phonological neighborhood
property to have a more negative effect on regulars than
irregulars. Indeed, when we separated irregular change
verbs into those with and without the correct past tense in
the neighborhood, the latter showed correlations similar
to those for the regular verbs. This indicates that it was not
verb class per se, but characteristics of the neighborhood
that influenced production. Until all such confounds
between verb subclass and other properties have been
found and controlled for, it is too soon to conclude that
differences in performance on regular and irregular verbs
provide evidence of separate processing mechanisms.
In addition, it is unlikely that phonological factors will
exclusively affect regulars and not irregular, while lexical
access factors will exclusively affect irregulars and not
regulars. Rather, the relative importance of these factors
may differ for the different verb types.
Improving L2 past tense performance
There are some applied implications of our results with
non-native English speakers. L2 learners tend to have
problems with the phonology of their second language,
and the severity of these problems also increases with
age of L2 acquisition (Baker & Trofimovich, 2005;
Flege & MacKay, 2004; Yeni-Komshian et al., 2000;
in the current study age of exposure to English for
the non-native speakers significantly correlated to the
phonological measure of phoneme overlap, r = -.42,

446

Janet L. McDonald and Cristine C. Roussel

p < .05). Poor phonological discrimination may leave
more words in competition during lexical recognition
(Weber & Cutler, 2004), and may leave L2 learners
more vulnerable to the influence of strong phonological
neighbors. Since the current study showed the particular
vulnerability L2 speakers had to vowel perception in
producing correct past tense forms, specialized training
on vowel perception (e.g., Lambacher, Martens, Kakehi,
Marasinghe & Molholt, 2005) may benefit past tense
production as well as generally decreasing lexical
competition for late L2 learners.
Regular past tense is one of the more difficult constructions for late L2 learners to master in grammaticality
judgment tasks (McDonald, 2006), perhaps due to
the difficulty in discriminating the slight phonological
difference between unmarked and past tense forms.
The results of the current study are consistent with
this interpretation - poor grammaticality judgments
were found specifically for regular past tense items in
Experiment 1 for L2 learners with poor phonological
ability and in Experiment 2 for native English speakers
stressed with noise. Additional training on extracting
phonological information from the ends of words may help
L2 learners improve regular past tense comprehension,
and would be useful for other constructions such as third
person singular verbs, and plural nouns.
Lexical access in L2 speakers may be poor due
to weaker links between semantic and phonological
representations that result from knowing more than one
language (Gollan et al., 2005). In addition, lexical access
may be influenced by the age of acquisition; in the
current study, age of exposure to English for the nonnative speakers marginally correlated to the lexical access
measure of picture naming accuracy, r = -.38, p < .08.
Lexical access speed is also known to be influenced by
the age at which a lexical item is acquired for both native
and non-native speakers, with later acquisition resulting
in slower speed (Ellis & Morrison, 1998; Hirsh, Morrison,
Gaset & Carnicer, 2003). Since irregular past tense forms
are more vulnerable to problems with lexical access, this
implies that L2 learners, and particularly L2 learners with
a late age of L2 acquisition, may have particular problems
with irregular past tense verbs. Indeed, Birdsong and
Flege (2001) found that age of L2 acquisition showed
stronger effects on knowledge of irregular than regular
past tense forms. Extra practice accessing irregular verbs
may be helpful in offsetting the negative effects of weaker
lexical access and age of acquisition effects for late L2
learners.
Conclusion
The difficulties L2 speakers have with L2 morphosyntax
could have their origin in non-syntactic aspects of the
second language that are not well mastered by the non-

native speaker. In the specific case of English past tense,
phonological weaknesses may impact regulars more than
irregulars, while poor lexical access may impact irregulars
more than regulars.

References
Baayen, R. H., & Moscoso del Prado Martin, F. (2005). Semantic
density and past-tense formation in three Germanic
languages. Language, 81, 666-698.
Baker, W., & Trofimovich, P. (2005). Interaction of nativeand second-language vowel system(s) in early and late
bilinguals. Language and Speech, 48, 1-27.
Basnight-Brown, D. M., Chen, L., Hua, S., Kostic, A.,
& Feldman, L. B. (2007). Monolingual and bilingual
recognition of regular and irregular English verbs:
Sensitivity to form similarity varies with first language
experience. Journal of Memory and Language, 57, 65-80.
Beck, M. L. (1997). Regular verbs, past tense, and frequency:
Tracking down a potential source of NS/NNS competence
differences. Second Language Research, 13, 93-115.
Bird, H., Lambon Ralph, M. A., Seidenberg, M. S., McClelland,
J. L., & Patterson, K. (2003). Deficits in phonology and
past-tense morphology: What's the connection? Journal of
Memory and Language, 48, 502-526.
Birdsong, D., & Flege, J. E. (2001). Regular-irregular
dissociations in L2 acquisition of English morphology.
BUCLD25: Proceedings of the 25th Annual Boston
University Conference on Language Development,
pp. 123-132. Boston, MA: Cascadilla Press.
Blackwell, A., & Bates, E. (1995). Inducing agrammatic profiles
in normals: Evidence for the selective vulnerability of
morphology under cognitive resource limitation. Journal
of Cognitive Neuroscience, 7, 228-257.
Braber, N., Patterson, K., Ellis, K., & Lambon Ralph, M. A.
(2005). The relationship between phonological and
morphological deficits in Broca's aphasia: Further evidence
from errors in verb inflection. Brain & Language, 92, 278-
287.
Burzio, L. (2002). Missing players: Phonology and the past tense
debate. Lingua, 112, 157-199.
Bybee, J. L., & Slobin, D. I. (1982). Rules and schema in the
development and use of the English past tense. Language,
58, 265-289.
Cameli, L., Phillips, N. A., Kousaie, S., & Panisset, M.
(2005). Memory and language in bilingual Alzheimer and
Parkinson patients: Insights from verb inflection. In J.
Cohen, K. T. McAlister, K. Rolstad & J. MacSwan (eds.),
ISB4: Proceedings of the 4th International Symposium on
Bilingualism, pp. 452-476. Somerville, MA: Cascadilla
Press.
Clark, H. H. (1973). The language-as-fixed-effect fallacy.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 12, 335-
359.
Cortese, M. J., Balota, D. A., Sergent-Marshall, S. D.,
Buckner, R. L., & Gold, B. T. (2006). Consistency and
regularity in past-tense verb generation in healthy ageing,
Alzheimer's disease, and semantic dementia. Cognitive
Neuropsychology, 23, 856-876.

Past tense in non-native speakers and stressed native speakers
Dick, F., Bates, E., & Ferstl, E. C. (2003). Spectral and temporal
degradation of speech as a simulation of morphosyntactic
deficits in English and German. Brain & Language, 85,
535-542.
Dick, F., Bates, E., Wulfeck, B., Utman, J. A., Dronkers,
N., & Gernsbacher, M. A. (2001). Language deficits,
localization, and grammar: Evidence for a distributive
model of language breakdown in aphasic patients and
neurologically intact individuals. Psychological Review,
108, 759-788.
Ellis, A. W., & Morrison, C. M. (1998). Real age-of-acquisition
effects in lexical retrieval. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 24, 515-
523.
Flege, J. E., Bohn, O., & Jang, S. (1997). Effects of experience on
non-native speakers' production and perception of English
vowels. Journal of Phonetics, 25, 437-470.
Flege, J. E., & MacKay, I. R. A. (2004). Perceiving vowels in a
second language. Studies in Second Language Acquisition,
26, 1-34.
Fox, R. A., Flege, J. E., & Munro, M. J. (1995). The perception of
English and Spanish vowels by native English and Spanish
listeners: A multidimensional scaling analysis. Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America, 97, 2540-2551.
Francis, W. N., & Kucera, H. (1982). Frequency analysis
of English usage: Lexicon and grammar. Boston, MA:
Houghton Mifflin.
Gollan, T. H., Montoya, R. I., Fennema-Notestine, C., & Morris,
S. K. (2005). Bilingualism affects picture naming but not
picture classification. Memory & Cognition, 33, 1220-
1234.
Hayiou-Thomas, M. E., Bishop, D. V. M., & Plunkett, K. (2004).
Simulating SLI: General cognitive processing stressors can
produce a specific linguistic profile. Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research, 47, 1347-1362.
Hirsh, K. W., Morrison, C. M., Gaset, S., & Carnicer, E.
(2003). Age of acquisition and speech production in L2.
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 6, 117-128.
Jia, G., & Fuse, A. (2007). Acquisition of English grammatical
morphology by native Mandarin-speaking children and
adolescents: Age-related differences. Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research, 50, 1280-1299.
Jiang, N. (2004). Morphological insensitivity in second language
processing. Applied Psycholinguistics, 25, 603-634.
Jiang, N. (2007). Selective integration of linguistic knowledge
in adult second language learning. Language Learning, 57,
1-33.
Joanisse, M. F., & Seidenberg, M. S. (1999). Impairments in
verb morphology after brain injury: A connectionist model.
Proceeding of the National Academy of Sciences, 96, 7592-
7597.
Johnson, J. S., & Newport, E. L. (1989). Critical period effects
in second language learning: The influence of maturational
state on the acquisition of English as a second language.
Cognitive Psychology, 21, 60-99.
Johnson, J. S., Shenkman, K. D., Newport, E. L., & Medin, D.
L. (1996). Indeterminacy in the grammar of adult language
learners. Journal of Memory and Language, 35, 335-352.
Kohnert, K. J., Hernandez, A. E., & Bates, E. (1998). Bilingual
performance on the Boston Naming Test: Preliminary

447

norms in Spanish and English. Brain & Language, 65, 422-
440.
Lambacher, S. G., Martens, W. L., Kakehi, K., Marasinghe,
C. A., & Molholt, G. (2005). The effects of identification
training on the identification and production of American
English vowels by native speakers of Japanese. Applied
Psycholinguistics, 26, 227-247.
Lambon Ralph, M. A., Braber, N., McClelland, J. L.,
& Patterson, K. (2005). What underlies the neuropsychological pattern of irregular > regular past-tense production?
Brain & Language, 93, 106-119.
Lenneberg, E. (1967). Biological foundations of language. New
York: Wiley.
Marchman, V. A. (1997). Children's productivity in the
English past tense: The role of frequency, phonology, and
neighborhood structure. Cognitive Science, 21, 283-304.
Marchman, V. A., Wulfeck, B., & Ellis Weismer, S. (1999).
Morphological productivity in children with normal
language and SLI: A study of the English past tense.
Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 42,
206-219.
McClelland, J. L., & Patterson, K. (2002). Rules or connections
in past-tense inflections: What does the evidence rule out?
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 6, 465-472.
McDonald, J. L. (2000). Grammaticality judgments in a second
language: Influences of age of acquisition and native
language. Applied Psycholinguistics, 21, 395-423.
McDonald, J. L. (2006). Alternatives to the critical period
hypothesis: Processing-based explanations for poor
grammaticality judgment performance by late second
language learners. Journal of Memory and Language, 55,
381-401.
McDonald, J. L. (2008). Grammaticality judgments in children:
The role of age, working memory and phonological ability.
Journal of Child Language, 35, 247-268.
Meador, D., Flege, J. E., & MacKay, I. R. (2000). Factors
affecting the recognition of words in a second language.
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 3, 55-67.
Meisel, J. M. (1997). The acquisition of the syntax of negation in
French and German: Contrasting first and second language
development. Second Language Research, 13, 227-
263.
Miozzo, M. (2003). On the processing of regular and irregular
forms of verbs and nouns: Evidence from neuropsychology.
Cognition, 87, 101-127.
Miyake, A., Carpenter, P. A., & Just, M. A. (1996). A capacity
approach to syntactic comprehension disorders: Making
normal adults perform like aphasic patients. Cognitive
Neuropsychology, 11, 671-717.
Murphy, V. A. (2004). Dissociable systems in second language
inflectional morphology. Studies in Second Language
Acquisition, 26, 433-459.
Nation, K., Snowling, M. J., & Clarke, P. (2005). Production
of the English past tense by children with language
comprehension impairments. Journal of Child Language,
32, 117-137.
Paradis, J., & Crago, M. (2000). Tense and temporality:
Similarities and differences between language-impaired
and second-language children. Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research, 43, 834-848.

448

Janet L. McDonald and Cristine C. Roussel

Paradis, J., Rice, M. L., Crago, M., & Marquis, J. (2008).
The acquisition of tense in English: Distinguishing child
second language from first language and specific language
impairment. Applied Psycholinguistics, 29, 689-722.
Patterson, K., Lambon Ralph, M. A., Hodges, J. R., &
McClelland, J. L. (2001). Deficits in irregular pasttense verb morphology associated with degraded semantic
knowledge. Neuropsychologia, 39, 709-724.
Pinker, S. (1994). The language instinct: How the mind creates
language. New York: William Morrow.
Pinker, S. (1999). Words and rules: The ingredients of language.
New York: Basic Books.
Pinker, S., & Ullman, M. T. (2002). The past and future of the
past tense. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 6, 456-463.
Prevost, P., & White, L. (2000). Missing surface inflection or
impairment in second language acquisition? Evidence from
tense and agreement. Second Language Research, 16, 103-
133.
Roberts, P. M., Garcia, L. J., Desrochers, A., & Hernandez, D.
(2002). English performance of proficient bilingual adults
on the Boston Naming Test. Aphasiology, 16, 635-645.
Rumelhart, D. E., & McClelland, J. L. (1986). On learning the
past tense of English verbs. In J. L. McClelland & D. E.
Rumelhart (eds.), Parallel distributed processing, pp. 217-
270. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Sleve, L. R., & Miyake, A. (2006). Individual differences in
second-language proficiency. Psychological Science, 17,
675-681.
Stemberger, J. P. (2004). Phonological priming and irregular
past. Journal of Memory and Language, 50, 82-95.
Szekely, A., Jacobsen, T., D'Amico, S., Devescovi, A.,
Andonova, E., Herron, D., Lu, C. C., Pechmann, T., Pleh,
C., Wicha, N., Federmeier, K., Gerdjikova, I., Gutierrez,
G., Hung, D., Hsu, J., Iyer, G., Kohnert, K., Mehotcheva,
T., Orozco-Figueroa, A., Tzeng, A., Tzeng, O., Arevalo,

A., Vargha, A., Butler, A. C., Buffington, R., & Bates, E.
(2004). A new on-line resource for psycholinguistic studies.
Journal of Memory and Language, 51 (2), 247-250.
Tyler, L. K., deMornay-Davies, P., Anokhina, R., Longworth,
C., Randall, B., & Marslen-Wilson, W. D. (2002a).
Dissociations in processing past tense morphology:
Neuropathology and behavioral studies. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 14, 79-94.
Tyler, L. K., Randall, B., & Marslen-Wilson, W. D. (2002b).
Phonology and neuropsychology of the English past tense.
Neuropsychologia, 40, 1154-1166.
Ullman, M. T. (2006). The declarative/procedural model and the
shallow structure hypothesis. Applied Psycholinguistics,
27, 97-105.
Ullman, M. T., Corkin, S., Coppola, M., Hickok, G., Growdon,
J. H., Koroshetz, W. J., & Pinker, S. (1997). A neural
dissociation within language: Evidence that the mental
dictionary is part of declarative memory, and that
grammatical rules are processed by the procedural system.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 9, 266-276.
Ullman, M. T., Pancheva, R., Love, T., Yee, E., Swinney, D.,
& Hickok, G. (2005). Neural correlates of lexicon and
grammar: Evidence from the production, reading, and
judgment of inflection in aphasia. Brain & Language, 93,
185-238.
Weber, A., & Cutler, A. (2004). Lexical competition in nonnative spoken-word recognition. Journal of Memory and
Language, 50, 1-25.
Yeni-Komshian, G. H., Flege, J. E., & Liu, S. (2000).
Pronunciation proficiency in the first and second languages
of Korean-English bilinguals. Bilingualism: Language and
Cognition, 3, 131-149.
Zhang, J., & Mueller, S. T. (2005). A not on ROC analysis and
non-parametric estimate of sensitivity. Psychometrika, 70,
145-154.

