Applied Psycholinguistics 32 (2011), 761-780
doi:10.1017/S0142716411000051

Bilingual parents' modeling of
pragmatic language use in multiparty
interactions
MEDHA TARE
University of Virginia
SUSAN A. GELMAN
University of Michigan
Received: March 12, 2009

Accepted for publication: February 22, 2010

ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE
Medha Tare, Department of Psychology, University of Virginia, P.O. Box 400400, Charlottesville,
VA 22904. E-mail: mtare@umich.edu
ABSTRACT
Parental input represents an important source of language socialization. Particularly in bilingual
contexts, parents may model pragmatic language use and metalinguistic strategies to highlight language
differences. The present study examines multiparty interactions involving 28 bilingual English- and
Marathi-speaking parent-child pairs in the presence of monolingual bystanders (children's mean ages =
3 years, 2 months and 4 years, 6 months). Their language use was analyzed during three sessions:
parent and child alone, parent and child with the English speaker, and parent and child with the Marathi
speaker. Parents demonstrated pragmatic differentiation by using relatively more of the bystander's
language; however, children did not show this sensitivity. Further, parents used a variety of strategies
to discuss language differences, such as providing and requesting translations; children translated
most often in response to explicit requests. The results indicate that parents model pragmatic language
differentiation as well as metalinguistic talk that may contribute to children's metalinguistic awareness.

Much research has examined how parents' language input relates to their children's
language development (Hart & Risley, 1992; Huttenlocher, Vasilyeva, Cymerman,
& Levine, 2002; Perez-Bazan, 2002; Snow & Ferguson, 1977). Bilingual parents
use a variety of strategies to socialize children's use of two languages. These
strategies have been examined in dyadic conversation (Kasuya, 1998; Lanza,
2001); however, little is known regarding how bilingual parents demonstrate appropriate pragmatic language skills in multiparty interactions. Parents may use
implicit strategies such as modeling pragmatic differentiation, or they may explicitly talk with children about when to use a particular language. Examining parents'
language use can illuminate what types of input are available to young children.
Thus, the primary goal of this research is to determine the extent to which parents
demonstrate pragmatic language use in the presence of a third party. A secondary
(c) Cambridge University Press 2011 0142-7164/11 $15.00

Applied Psycholinguistics 32:4
Tare & Gelman: Bilingual interactions

762

goal of the present research is to examine the metalinguistic strategies bilingual
parents use with their children to highlight language differences. Finally, a tertiary
goal is to examine the extent to which children demonstrate pragmatic language
use in this context, as well as how children respond to parental metalinguistic
strategies.
Bilingual children are surprisingly skilled at adapting their language use to their
interlocutors (De Houwer, 2009). They show an early capacity to use their two
languages appropriately (also known as "pragmatic differentiation") with their
parents, by using more of a parent's preferred language with them (De Houwer,
1990; Deuchar & Quay, 1999; Koppe & Meisel, 1995; Montanari, 2009; Nicoladis
& Genesee, 1996; Quay, 2008). Bilingual children (M = 2 years, 2 months [2;2])
also show language accommodation when speaking directly with strangers, using
relatively more of the stranger's language during a free-play session than they
would normally (Genesee, Boivin, & Nicoladis, 1996). However, many factors
affect bilingual children's and adults' language choices (Kasuya, 2002). Tare
and Gelman (2010) found that although bilingual preschoolers produced the appropriate language a majority of the time during a free-play conversation with
an unfamiliar interlocutor, they had difficulty producing specific labels in the
appropriate language when given minimal conversational cues. Further, older
preschoolers showed more pragmatic sensitivity in this object-naming task than
younger children, suggesting that pragmatic differentiation skills have a protracted
development and that success in one context does not predict success in another
context. Thus, although bilingual children can show early pragmatic differentiation of their languages when speaking directly with a monolingual interlocutor,
it is unclear whether children would be able to accommodate in a more difficult
situation, such as to a third party's language preference. A multiparty context is
of particular interest, in that it allows one to disentangle knowledge of a speaker's
language background from ongoing feedback that a speaker provides during conversation. For example, a child who successfully switches from English to French
when in conversation with a French-speaking individual may be doing so either
because they have noted that the individual knows French or because they receive
ongoing feedback that the individual seems not to understand or react when she
tries to use English. By including a third-party individual who just listens in on
the conversation but does not participate in it, one can discern which information
children are using.
Bilingual children may learn to navigate complex linguistic situations by following an adult's lead in the conversation (Comeau, Genesee, & Lapaquette, 2003).
Several analyses have focused on how parents use socialization strategies to influence or adjust children's language use, particularly in one-parent/one-language
households where parents want to maintain the child's use of the home language.
Lanza (2001) employed a language socialization framework in her analysis of
parents' strategies for dealing with children's language mixing. This framework
contends that, "the processing of linguistic knowledge occurs simultaneously with
the processing of social knowledge, with language socialization beginning as soon
as the infant has social contact" (p. 202). The analysis revealed several strategies
that aim to socialize children linguistically, depending on their parents' personal
or community attitudes regarding language mixing. Lanza found that parents'

Applied Psycholinguistics 32:4
Tare & Gelman: Bilingual interactions

763

reactions to children using a nonpreferred language can range on a continuum
of maintaining a monolingual context (by indicating incomprehension and using
clarification requests) to engaging in a bilingual context (by switching languages
themselves).
Kasuya (1998) examined parents' use of these and other strategies in the context
of English-Japanese bilingual acquisition in the United States, where parents
wanted to encourage children to use Japanese, the minority language. In this
study, parents were found to use techniques such as restating a child's utterance
from the majority language to the preferred (minority) language. Although this
technique implicitly conveys the parent's preference, explicit instruction to use
the preferred language or translate an utterance also occurred. Kasuya's (1998)
analysis of the effectiveness of these strategies in getting the child to use Japanese
in his next utterance showed that the explicit strategies, such as instructing the
child to use Japanese or correcting the child's utterances, were associated with
higher rates of success than the implicit strategies.
Beyond dyadic interactions, bilingual adults also follow complex, often unspoken rules, when navigating conversations with multiple people, assessing factors
such as others' fluency or social status when deciding which language to use
(Kasuya, 2002). Thus, it is important to look beyond the parent-child dyad and
examine a variety of conversational contexts (Lanza, 2007), as has been done
in word learning research (Akhtar, 2005). Lanza (2001) examined triadic interactions of a Norwegian/English bilingual child who was living in a primarily
one-parent/one-language home. These situations were examined through a "participation framework," in which participants could have the role of primary addressee
or the role of "auditor," someone who was part of the interaction in a particular
conversational exchange but not spoken to directly (p. 222). One example of this
situation was that the child's mother used her less dominant language to encourage the daughter to tell the father about her day in his language. Lanza proposed
that these various strategies, which she characterizes as "negotiations," socialize
children to understand how languages are used in their household.
Language socialization occurs not only in the home but also in the broader social
context of the community; this may also affect children's language use and how
well they adhere to their parents' modeling of pragmatics. Sociolinguistic factors,
such as majority/minority language differences, may have a strong influence on
children's language choice. Work on bilingual acquisition shows that in their
interactions, parents often prefer to use the minority home language and children
prefer to use the majority societal language (Muysken, Kook, & Vedder, 1996; Pan,
1995; Vedder, Kook, & Muysken, 1996). Although research looking at bilingual
children's ability to translate has found that 3- and 5-year-olds are capable of
repairing communication breakdowns by translating (Comeau & Genesee, 2001;
Comeau, Genesee, & Mendelson, 2007), it does not mean that they will always
be willing to do so. Thus, it is important to consider sociolinguistic factors when
examining children's language use.
Finally, parents may use metalinguistic strategies to highlight and bring attention to language differences, in addition to using them to encourage children to
use one language over the other. Metalinguistic skills encompass the knowledge,
ability, and awareness that allow one to link the abstract nature of language to

Applied Psycholinguistics 32:4
Tare & Gelman: Bilingual interactions

764

actual language use (Bialystok, 2001). These skills, such as comments on other
people's language use and requests for translations, develop as children learn
to use language in different ways (Koppe & Meisel, 1995; Malakoff & Hakuta,
1991). Many researchers have examined how the bilingual experience of switching
between languages might enhance children's metacognitive abilities compared
to monolingual children (Cummins, 1978; Ianco-Worral, 1972; Rosenblum &
Pinker, 1983). Bilingual children have shown enhanced metalinguistic skills on
many different tasks, including making grammatical judgments (Bialystok, 1988;
Galambos & Goldin-Meadow, 1990) and measures that require awareness of the
arbitrary nature of words, such as Piaget's sun-moon task (Bialystok, 1988). Relatedly, bilingual children have recently shown a greater capacity than monolingual
children for other executive function and pragmatic understanding skills, such
as managing conflicting attentional demands, taking into account a speaker's language knowledge when learning novel labels, and showing sensitivity to violations
of conversational maxims (Carlson & Meltzoff, 2008; Diesendruck 2005; Siegal,
Iozzi, & Surian, 2009). Metalinguistic talk with parents may also contribute to
these skills.
PRESENT STUDY

In the present study, we examine the ways in which bilingual parents and children
navigate a multiparty interaction. We specifically study the extent to which parents
model language use through pragmatic differentiation and metalinguistic talk and
how children respond. The present sample is ideally suited for examining this
issue because it represents a very common familial profile, consisting of bilingual
parents who regularly use both languages with their children and in everyday
life (in contrast to one-parent/one-language families; Hakuta & D'Andrea, 1992;
Pearson, 2007). We examine families in the United States where both parents
and their children speak English and Marathi, which is an Indo-Aryan language
primarily spoken in the Maharasthra state of India by nearly 96 million people
(Wali, 2005).
Our picture-book task examines parents' and children's pragmatic differentiation through a subtle manipulation, in which they speak with each other, but in
the presence of a third person who speaks only one of the two languages, and
who does not actively participate in the conversation. The two researchers were a
Caucasian female who spoke only English and an Indian female who spoke only
Marathi during the entire research session. The context is considered to be subtle
for children for two reasons: first, their primary addressee, their parent, is bilingual
and therefore can respond to either language, and second, the third person does
not provide any feedback of their language knowledge and preference during the
conversation. Children's successful performance depends on their attention to one
of two cues: (a) knowledge of the bystander's language ability, despite the lack
of feedback, and/or (b) variation in their parent's language choice (e.g., the child
may note that the parent tends to use one language in a context, even though the
parent is known to readily speak both languages). For this study, we hypothesized
that parents would differentiate in their language use, thereby showing a mature
form of this subtle pragmatic differentiation, as well as providing a language

Applied Psycholinguistics 32:4
Tare & Gelman: Bilingual interactions

765

model for their children. However, we predicted, based on the subtle nature of
this manipulation as well as previous research showing that children have more
difficulty differentiating in a context with fewer conversational cues, that children
would not differentiate their languages in this context.
To examine the possibility that bilingual parents may provide metalinguistic
feedback to their children, we also examined the extent to which parents and children engaged in metalinguistic conversation during picture book reading. Given
prior research (Kasuya, 1998), we predicted that parents would request and provide
translations as well as explicitly refer to the names of the languages of the labels
being discussed.
METHOD

Participants

The participants for this study were young bilingual children who spoke English
and Marathi. The younger age group included 14 children (9 female) who ranged
in age from 2;7 to 3;10 (M = 3;2). The older age group included 14 children (4
female) who ranged in age from 4;1 to 4;11 (M = 4;6). The reported average
English/Marathi ratio of vocabulary knowledge, as measured by the MacArthur
Communicative Development Inventory (CDI), for the younger age group was
1.19:1 words. The reported average English/Marathi ratio of vocabulary knowledge for the older age group was 1.37:1 words. Three additional children were
contacted but not included in the study: two children (both younger) did not
meet the criterion for bilingual ability (see below); one child (older) refused to
participate. Twenty-six of the children were tested in a Marathi household; two
were tested in a research lab.
The children's mothers' average age was 33.37 years, and 92% had at least a
college education. Their fathers' average age was 37.08 years, and 92% had at
least a college education. The parents immigrated to the United States an average
of 6.86 years before participating in the study. Seventy-one percent of children in
the older age group and 43% of children in the younger age group attended some
amount of English-speaking daycare during the week. One bilingual parent of each
child participated in the task with the child. For 27 dyads, the mother participated;
for one dyad, the father participated. All of the parents who participated in the
study reported knowledge of both English and Marathi; 39% of these parents also
reported knowledge of at least one other Indian language, most often Hindi. All
of the parent participants endorsed that it was very important to them for their
children to know Marathi.
Design

The task was designed to be a quasinaturalistic situation where the parent looks
at a picture book with the child. The research session was divided into three
sessions: (a) parent and child alone, (b) parent and child with the Caucasian
researcher who spoke exclusively in English to them, and (c) parent and child
with the Indian researcher who spoke exclusively in Marathi to them. The

Applied Psycholinguistics 32:4
Tare & Gelman: Bilingual interactions

766

between-subjects variables were speaker (parent or child) and child's age group
(older or younger). The within-subject variable was session (parent-child, parent-
child-English speaker, parent-child-Marathi speaker) and the dependent variable
was language used (English or Marathi).
Materials and supplementary measures

Materials for the task included three binders that contained pages of brightly
colored photographs of everyday objects and no written text. Each binder depicted
16 objects (different across the three binders), intended to be fairly familiar to
the children (e.g., car, bucket, spoon). One binder was used for each session, with
the order of the binders counterbalanced between subjects, such that all three
binders occurred roughly equally in the three different language sessions, across
participants.
MacArthur CDI. The MacArthur CDI for preschoolers (Fenson et al., 1994) was

originally developed in English. This measure was translated into Marathi for
use in this study, with the help of a native Marathi speaker who was raised in
India and educated in Marathi. We calculated how many items children knew in
each language using just the items that had translation equivalents on the measure
(442 items). Using this measure of children's productive vocabulary in the two
languages, we established a criterion that children had to meet in order to be
included in the study. Specifically, we required that the ratio of one language to
the other (in terms of number of words on the MacArthur CDI) could not be greater
than 3:1; that is, at least one-quarter of their total vocabulary was required to be
in their less known language. Two children were not included in the final sample
because they did not meet these criteria.
Language background questionnaire. A questionnaire for parents was created

to assess each child's language environment at home and at child care. Parent
background variables such as age, education, and language use were assessed.
Attitudes toward raising a child bilingually were also assessed.
Procedure

Parents observed earlier tasks in the research session where children had engaged
directly with the experimenters, and therefore knew what the language abilities
of the two experimenters were. The English-speaking experimenter was a female
monolingual English speaker. The Marathi-speaking experimenter was a female
bilingual Marathi/English speaker but only spoke Marathi throughout the research
session (i.e., she acted as a monolingual Marathi speaker).
The first session always included the parent and child alone. The order of the
English and Marathi sessions was counterbalanced between subjects. At the start
of the first session, parents were given the following instructions: "We're interested
in how you ordinarily talk in this situation. Take as much time as you need. You
can use both languages as you normally would. A helper will come in with the
next book when you're finished." When they were finished with the first binder,

Applied Psycholinguistics 32:4
Tare & Gelman: Bilingual interactions

767

the first experimenter entered and provided them with a second binder, saying in
her respective language, "Hi, remember me? Do you remember my name? I'm
[experimenter's name]. Here's another book. I'm going to sit here with you and
your mom/dad and look at the pictures with you." Following the completion of this
binder, the first experimenter left and the second experimenter entered, provided
the parent with the third binder, and introduced herself in the same way in her
respective language. Generally, the researchers sat on the other side of the child
than the parent; they were instructed to look engaged in the discussion about the
picture book, but not to converse unless spoken to.
Coding

The entire research session was videotaped and then transcribed for analysis in
the CLAN program, used by the CHILDES database (MacWhinney & Snow,
1990). The utterances in the transcripts were operationalized as continuous units
of speech or thought without long pauses or interruptions; utterances consisted of
words, phrases, sentences, or multiple sentences. Several coding schemes were
used in the analysis, in order to examine different aspects of the parent-child
conversation. Reliability was calculated by two bilingual coders using 20% of the
data across both age groups. See Appendix A for the coding of an excerpt of the
parent-child conversation.
Language use coding. The goal of this coding scheme was to capture the lan-

guage used by parents and children during the picture book task. This coding
scheme is based in part on Muysken's (2000) coding of bilingual code mixing.
Utterances were coded as Complete English (fully in English, with no Marathi,
although proper names can be in either language), Complete Marathi (fully in
Marathi, with no English, although English proper names or borrowed words
with no Marathi translation could be included), English with Marathi Insertion (insertion of Marathi lexical items into English structure, i.e., word order),
Marathi with English Insertion (insertion of English lexical items into Marathi
structure, including quoted English words), and Neutral (not identifiable as belonging to either language, e.g., "hmm," "umm," or proper nouns;  = 0.93, 96%
agreement).
Because much of the conversation involved parents asking for labels for the
pictures, we also coded the language that children used to label a picture for the
first time and how that related to whether parents followed up with a metalinguistic
strategy ( = 0.95; 96% agreement).
Metalinguistic talk coding. The goal of this coding was to examine ways in which

parents encouraged children to focus on the two language systems. We primarily
examined how parents and children discussed translation equivalents, that is,
lexical items in English and Marathi that refer to the same object (e.g., key,
killi). The codes were not mutually exclusive. Reliability was calculated for each
code individually. For each example below, the coded utterance is in bold and a
translation is provided for any utterance containing Marathi (italicized).

Applied Psycholinguistics 32:4
Tare & Gelman: Bilingual interactions

768

(1) Requests Translation: speaker requests a translation for a label that has already been
provided in one language ( = 0.90; 99% agreement).
MOT:
%eng:
MOT:
%eng:

Ani Marathit kai munthat?
And what is it called in Marathi?
Potatoesla kai mhantow apan?
What do we call "potatoes"?

(2) Provides Translation: speaker provides a translation for an item that has already been
labeled in one language ( = 0.86; 99% agreement).
CHI:
MOT:
%eng:

Keys
Keys mhanje killi
"Keys" means keys

(3) Suggests Translation: parent suggests possible translations for an item already labeled
in one language ( = 0.79; 99% agreement).
MOT:
%eng:

Bedook munthat ka?
Is it called frog?

(4) Requests Repetition of Translation: parent requests that the child repeat the translation that was provided (100% agreement).
MOT:
%eng:
MOT:
%eng:

Safarchand
Apple
Kai mhanaych?
What is it called?

(5) Repeats Translation Equivalent: speaker repeats a translation that was provided in a
previous utterance (coded for each repetition;  = 0.81; 99% agreement).
MOT:
%eng:
MOT:
%eng:
CHI:
%eng:

Huh, phooga
Yeah, balloon
Kai mhanaych?
What is it called?
Phooga
Balloon

(6) Uses Name of Language: speaker uses the name of a language (English, Marathi;  =
0.80; 99% agreement).
MOT:
%eng:

Ani Marathit kai munthat?
And what is it called in Marathi?

RESULTS

Preliminary analyses were conducted with gender and order of language sessions
(English Marathi, Marathi English) as variables; however, because they were
not found to be significant factors, they were excluded from further analyses.

Applied Psycholinguistics 32:4
Tare & Gelman: Bilingual interactions

769

Background language measures

Based on parental report on the MacArthur CDI (analyses reported in Tare and
Gelman, 2010), older children (M = 419.29, SD = 24.00) knew significantly
more English vocabulary items overall than younger children (M = 310.64, SD =
105.06). There was no significant age difference in older (M = 307.00, SD =
48.67) and younger children's (M = 261.93, SD = 95.74) reported knowledge of
Marathi vocabulary. However, older children (M = 284.14, SD = 53.30) knew
more sets of translation equivalents in English and Marathi than younger children
(M = 203.21, SD = 97.89).
Pragmatic differentiation across sessions

Overall, in support of our primary hypothesis, parents demonstrated sensitivity in
their language use in the presence of a monolingual third party, whereas children
did not adjust their language use. To address this research question, we examined
their language use across sessions, that is, whether they used relatively more
of each researcher's language (English or Marathi) when she was present. For
the language-used variable, we report the results using the Marathi-Plus coding
category, which included complete Marathi utterances as well as those utterances
that were coded as Marathi with English insertions. This is because many of both
the adults' and children's utterances were primarily Marathi except for one word
(over 20%). In order to provide a more conservative test, we also conducted the
following analysis with complete Marathi utterances (not Marathi-Plus), and with
just one exception (noted below), the results were comparable.
We conducted a repeated-measures analysis of variance with the number of
utterances produced in each language (Marathi-Plus, English) as the dependent
variable and the following factors: 3 (Session: parent-child alone; parent-child-
Marathi Speaker; parent-child-English speaker) x 2 (Children's Age Category:
older, younger) x 2 (Speaker: parent, child). There was a significant Session x
Language interaction, F (2, 51) = 19.15, p < .01, which was subsumed under
a significant Session x Language x Speaker interaction, F (2, 51) = 7.15, p <
.01 (see Figure 1). Pairwise comparisons revealed that there were no significant
differences in children's use of English or Marathi-Plus across the three sessions;
however, there were significant differences across sessions in parents' language
use. Parents used significantly more English in the parent-child alone session than
when the Marathi speaker was present ( p < .05), and they also used significantly
more English when the English speaker was present than when the Marathi speaker
was present ( p < .01). Parents used significantly more Marathi in the parent-child
alone session than when the English speaker was present ( p < .01), and they also
used significantly more Marathi when the Marathi speaker was present than when
the English speaker was present ( p < .01). These results support our primary
hypothesis that parents would model pragmatic differentiation, but that children
would not show this sensitivity.
Overall, more utterances were spoken in Marathi-Plus than in English (see
Table 1), as revealed by the main effect of language, F (1, 52) = 8.06, p < .01.
(This was the only effect that was not significant when the analysis of variance was

Applied Psycholinguistics 32:4
Tare & Gelman: Bilingual interactions

770
English

Mean Percentage of Utterances

Marathi-Plus
100
80
60
40
20
0
Parent-Child

With English Speaker
Sub-Session
(a)

With Marathi Speaker

Parent-Child

With English Speaker
Sub-Session
(b)

With Marathi Speaker

Mean Percentage of Utterances

100
80
60
40
20
0

Mean Percentage of Utterances

100
80
60
40
20
0
Parent-Child

With English Speaker
Sub-Session
(c)

With Marathi Speaker

Figure 1. The mean percentage of (a) parents', (b) older children's (M age = 4;6), and (c)
younger children's (M age = 3;2) utterances in English and Marathi-Plus for each subsession.

Applied Psycholinguistics 32:4
Tare & Gelman: Bilingual interactions

771

Table 1. Mean (standard deviation) number of utterances by age category,
subsession, language used, and speaker
Younger Children
(M age = 3;2)

Parent-child
English
Marathi-Plus
With English speaker
English
Marathi-Plus
With Marathi speaker
English
Marathi-Plus

Older Children
(M age = 4;6)

Child

Parent

Child

Parent

23.71 (5.25)
13.07 (10.23)

12.21 (8.31)
55.71 (30.83)

20.86 (7.76)
9.14 (8.20)

11.57 (5.63)
33.50 (24.64)

23.57 (6.49)
10.79 (8.79)

14.64 (9.62)
45.29 (34.08)

20.07 (9.29)
4.64 (4.58)

16.21 (13.19)
17.64 (17.93)

23.21 (7.24)
15.14 (13.90)

7.21 (5.83)
58.57 (43.49)

19.00 (8.20)
10.07 (10.34)

9.36 (7.72)
28.79 (20.37)

Note: Ages are in years;months.

run with only complete Marathi utterances, rather than Marathi-Plus.) This main
effect must be interpreted within the significant Language x Speaker interaction,
F (1, 52) = 44.22, p < .01, with children producing significantly more English
utterances than Marathi Plus and parents producing significantly more MarathiPlus than English. Thus, as other researchers have found (Pan, 1995; Vedder
et al., 1996), parents tend to use the minority language (i.e., their native language),
whereas children tend to use the majority language (which many of them are also
hearing in preschool). However, there was also a Language x Age Category x
Speaker interaction, F (1, 52) = 4.85, p < .05, which generally showed the same
pattern as the Language x Speaker interaction, except that parents of the older
children used significantly less Marathi-Plus than parents of the younger children,
suggesting that these parents may be accommodating to the older children's greater
exposure to English.
Finally, there were several main effects, including session, F (2, 51) = 5.95,
p < .01, such that there was significantly less talk overall with the English speaker
present than in the parent-child alone session, probably reflecting parents' overall
tendency to produce fewer English utterances. There was a main effect of age
category, F (1, 52) = 8.92, p < .01, with more utterances spoken in the younger
children's sessions than in the older children's sessions, and there was a main
effect of speaker, F (1, 52) = 11.75, p < .01, with parents talking more than
children.
Metalinguistic strategies

In support of our hypothesis regarding strategy use, parents used a variety of metalinguistic strategies, such as requesting and providing translations (see Table 2).

Applied Psycholinguistics 32:4
Tare & Gelman: Bilingual interactions

772

Table 2. Mean (standard deviation) number of linguistic strategies used by parents,
older children (M age = 4;6), and younger children (M age = 3;2)

Requests translation
Provides translation equivalent
Suggests translation
Requests repetition of translation
Repeats translation
Uses name of language
First labels in English
First labels in Marathi

Parent

Older Children

Younger Children

8.54 (11.34)
5.21 (5.42)
0.82 (1.66)
0.29 (0.81)
2.39 (4.00)
6.25 (10.41)
--
--

0.00 (0.00)
2.36 (3.99)
0.00 (0.00)
0.00 (0.00)
0.86 (0.77)
0.43 (1.34)
41.07 (7.99)
3.64 (2.02)

0.00 (0.00)
3.57 (4.62)
0.00 (0.00)
0.00 (0.00)
4.36 (6.32)
0.07 (0.27)
34.21 (8.61)
7.21 (5.38)

Note: Ages are in years;months.

The majority of parents (79%, or 22/28) used at least one strategy, and nearly half
(43%, or 12/28) used such strategies on 10% or more of their utterances. The most
frequently used metalinguistic strategy was the parent requesting a translation
equivalent from the child. As predicted, parents often used the names of the two
languages and provided translations. They also repeated translations themselves,
and parents rarely requested that the child repeat a translation. Finally, a few parents
occasionally suggested translations when the child was trying to remember one,
as a hint. Children provided translations and repeated translations, but did not
request translations from their parents. Sixty-five percent of parents' translations
were given in Marathi (as opposed to English). Eighty-four percent of children's
translations were given in Marathi.
To examine developmental changes, we conducted t tests comparing the use of
the individual metalinguistic strategies by age group. Younger children repeated
translation equivalents more often than older children, t (26) = -2.06, p = .05.
However, this may be the result of a nonsignificant tendency for parents of younger
children (M = 7.14, SD = 6.44) to provide more translation equivalents than
parents of older children (M = 3.29, SD = 3.38), t (26) = -1.98, p = .058.
Parents' use of metalinguistic strategies did not differ significantly by session.
Further, there was no relation between parents' use of metalinguistic strategies and
their children's ability to show sensitivity to the bystander's language knowledge.
Parents' marking of translations in conversation. In order to determine how ex-

plicit parents' use of translations was in conversation, we analyzed whether parents
"marked" the translations that they provided. This was done by examining whether
parents made an explicit comment regarding the translation prior to providing it
(i.e., requesting a translation or using the name of a language) or if they stated it
without making any comment, so that children would have to realize themselves
that it was a translation equivalent. The analysis showed that 60% of parents'
translations were marked, with 41% of translations to older children and 68% of
translations provided to younger children explicitly marked. These results indicate
that, similar to parents of monolingual children who explain when they provide

Applied Psycholinguistics 32:4
Tare & Gelman: Bilingual interactions

773

multiple English labels for an item (Callanan & Sabbagh, 2004), bilingual parents
also tend to clarify the relationship between the labels in the two languages in this
context.
Strategies that elicited children's translations. We also looked at the content of

parents' utterances prior to children's production of translations in order to determine the circumstances under which children are likely to translate. Twenty percent
of children's translations were provided spontaneously, without prompting. Eighty
percent of children's translations were given in response to parents' translation
requests, as coded above. Of these translation requests made by parents, 67%
explicitly used the name of the language they wanted the child to translate a label
into, whereas the rest were more subtle in nature. Thus, the majority of children's
translations were provided after an explicit prompt from their parent. Parents'
more subtle prompts to translate came in different forms, including questions such
as "what else is it called?" or "what do we call it?" when reminding the child of
the Marathi label that is used at home.
Parents' differential use of strategies. Children provided more "first labels" for

the pictures in English (M = 37.64, SD = 8.87) than in Marathi (M = 5.43, SD =
4.38), t (27) = 14.43, p < .01. Older children provided significantly more first
labels in English than younger children, t (26) = 2.18, p < .05, and younger
children provided significantly more first labels in Marathi than older children, t
(26) = -2.33, p < .05 (see Table 2). In terms of raw frequencies, parents used a
metalinguistic strategy more often after the child first provided an English label
for a picture (M = 4.78, SD = 6.41) than after the child first provided a Marathi
label (M = 1.25, SD = 1.69), t (27) = 3.01, p < .01, which is not surprising
given that most of children's first labels were in English. However, we predicted
that the percentage of trials on which parents used a translation strategy would
be higher for Marathi first labels than English first labels, as parents would have
a bias toward ensuring that children knew the English label for an object (given
the status of English as the majority language). Thus, we predicted that parents
would be particularly likely to use one of the metalinguistic strategies to elicit or
provide the English label if the child gave the Marathi label first. As predicted,
the percentage of Marathi first labels provided by children that was followed by a
translation strategy (M = 21.43, SD = 26.16) was higher than the percentage of
English first labels that was followed by a translation strategy (M = 11.89, SD =
14.23), t (27) = -1.83, p < .05 (one tailed).
DISCUSSION

When learning language, bilingual children must learn to accommodate their
conversational partners, ranging from direct addressees to third-person auditors
who are not directly spoken to but are nonetheless part of the interaction (Bell,
1984). Overall, our findings support our hypotheses that parents model pragmatic
language use with their preschool children in the presence of a third party and
also engage in metalinguistic conversations that highlight language differences.
We will discuss these two research findings in turn.

Applied Psycholinguistics 32:4
Tare & Gelman: Bilingual interactions

774

Pragmatic differentiation

In examining conversations between bilingual parents and children that included a
monolingual third person, we found that children did not differentiate in their use of
either language across the sessions, despite their parents' sensitivity to the language
capabilities of the bystander. Thus, this difficulty was specifically a developmental
problem: the parents made an attempt to ensure that the researchers could follow
the conversation, even though neither experimenter participated directly in the
conversation. This was not done explicitly; that is, none of the parents said, "Let's
use English because [experimenter's name] is in the room," but rather they used
relatively more of her language than they did in the session where they were
alone or with the other speaker present. It is possible that parents considered the
researchers to be sanctioned participants in the interactions, whereas children did
not; this may relate to developments in understanding of social situations more
generally, not specifically related to bilingual development. Nonetheless, parents
were not overly concerned with the presence of the researcher, or they would
have switched their language use completely. Rather, they seem to have been
demonstrating a mature pragmatic response to the situation (either deliberately or
perhaps even unconsciously), by trying to grant the researcher more access to the
conversation than she would have otherwise. Consider, for example, a parent of
a younger female participant adjusting her language use by requesting a label for
the picture in the bystander's language.
parent-child session MOT:
%eng:
CHI:
parent-child-Marathi speaker session MOT:
%eng:
CHI:
parent-child-English speaker session MOT:
CHI:

Hai kai eh?
What is this?
fork
Hai kai eh?
What is this?
orange
Okay, what is this?
leaf

Children could have responded to parents' accommodation as a form of scaffolding, but they did not match their parents' language use in this respect. Although
children have shown early pragmatic differentiation when speaking directly with a
monolingual interlocutor, in this study, they showed no sensitivity to the presence
of the researchers. This occurred despite having the researchers' language use and
even physical appearance as cues to their linguistic ability. Further, the children
who participated in this study had already completed a task that same day in
which they interacted with the researchers directly during free play. During the
free-play context, they adjusted their language use according to the researchers'
language preferences (Tare & Gelman, 2010). This result suggests that the children had particular difficulty accommodating their language use to a third-person
auditor. We suspect that children's lack of sensitivity may reflect the lack of direct
linguistic feedback from the conversational partner, leading children to be either
unaware of the language needs of the third party, or unable to accommodate
continually in the situation. Bilingual children's responsiveness to pragmatic cues

Applied Psycholinguistics 32:4
Tare & Gelman: Bilingual interactions

775

is positively related to developments in theory of mind (Tare & Gelman, 2010).
Thus, it is possible that children would become more sensitive to a third person's linguistic needs as their general social-cognitive understanding increases.
Future research could also examine nonverbal behaviors, such as gaze, to determine the extent to which children ratified the researcher as a participant in the
interaction.
Metalinguistic strategies

In this study, we also found that bilingual parents use a variety of metalinguistic
strategies to highlight translations for object labels during an everyday task. Parents
were not asked to discuss translations or provide multiple labels; nonetheless, the
majority of parents (79%) used at least one of the metalinguistic strategies that
we analyzed. Further, parents did not use more strategies when a researcher was
present than when they were alone with the child, suggesting that metalinguistic
talk occurs naturally and not in response to an expectation from a researcher. The
primary strategies, which we expected to find, were that parents asked children
to provide translations, provided translations themselves, and used the names of
the two languages. However, these naturalistic data also provided the opportunity
to examine other strategies that parents used, which we coded once we found
more than one parent spontaneously using them. These include parents requesting
that children repeat the translations that were provided, repeating translations
themselves, and even suggesting translations to their children (which were sometimes intentionally wrong so that children would recognize the right one when
parents said it). These strategies often focused on translating into the minority
language of Marathi but were not necessarily intended to shift children's language use away from the majority language of English, in contrast to parental
strategies examined in other studies (Kasuya, 1998; Lanza, 2001). Ultimately,
the strategies brought metalinguistic topics to the forefront of the picture book
conversation.
We further analyzed the nuances of parents' and children's talk about translations. When providing translations, parents often explicitly mark that they are
providing a label in the other language, suggesting that they may be trying to
help children organize their language knowledge. A potential consequence of
this explicit talk may be that bilingual children develop language learning biases,
such as mutual exclusivity, differently compared to monolingual children (Au &
Glusman, 1990).
Another way in which this talk varies is the explicitness of parents' translation requests. Some parents' questions were explicit, such as "what is it called
in Marathi?", whereas other questions were more subtle or ambiguous, such as
"what do we call it?" or "what else is it called?" We found that children's translations were most often given in response to requests that used the name of the
language. This finding is consistent with other analyses of bilingual parent-child
conversation showing that children used the parents' preferred language more
after parents used explicit strategies (Kasuya, 1998). Thus, children may find
it easier to successfully translate or switch languages when an explicit cue is
provided.

Applied Psycholinguistics 32:4
Tare & Gelman: Bilingual interactions

776

Sociolinguistic factors

In considering sociolinguistic factors that affected the conversations, we found that
although the majority of parents' translation efforts followed children's English
labels (because most of children's first labels were in English), the percentage of
Marathi first labels that were followed by translation strategies was higher than the
percentage of English first labels that were followed by translation strategies. This
finding suggests that parents were particularly likely to ensure that children knew
the English label for an object. This bias might result from the value that parents
place on their children becoming skilled in the majority language of English,
which is the language of instruction at school. This result is consistent with the
findings of Vedder et al. (1996), who argued that bilingual families often have a
functional differentiation, or "language use connected with particular socialization
settings (e.g., the school)," and that parents use the two languages differently
according to their perception of what is associated with academic knowledge
(p. 464). In their study, lexical categories such as numerals were often spoken
in the majority language of Dutch, suggesting that parents may deem it more
important or appropriate for the child to learn a particular concept in one of the
languages, most likely the majority language (Muysken et al., 1996).
Consistent with what other researchers have found (Kasuya, 1998; Lanza, 2001;
Pan, 1995; Vedder et al., 1996), parents primarily used the minority language of
Marathi (i.e., their native language) in our study whereas children primarily used
the majority language, English. The pull of the majority language of English can
be seen throughout the study, despite parents' high rates of Marathi use with their
children. Parents showed some bias toward English in that they did not expect
children to label pictures in Marathi and even seemed to prefer that children
know the labels in English. Parents allowed a bilingual context (Lanza, 2001) and
children exhibited some tendencies of "passive" bilinguals who understand both
languages but mainly speak one of them (Kasuya, 1998). Thus, children's lack
of pragmatic sensitivity may also have resulted from their engaging in a typical
conversational pattern of responding to their parents' Marathi questions in English.
There were also some developmental differences, possibly arising from the
influence of children's increasing experience with English-speaking preschools; a
greater number of older children attended preschool than younger children. Older
children also provided more first labels in English than younger children. Although
parents of older and younger children did not differ in how many translations they
requested from their children, there was a trend for parents of older children to
provide fewer translations and explicitly mark fewer translations, suggesting that
both older children and their parents may be accepting more English into their
conversational patterns.
These findings support the perspective that sociolinguistic factors affect bilingual parents' and children's language use, with parents generally preferring to use
their native language and children preferring the majority language, particularly as
they get older (Fishman, 1991). Nonetheless, parents of both age groups modeled
pragmatically appropriate language use and chose to elicit and explicitly discuss
translations with their children. This type of conversation may be an important
source of information for bilingual children's developing pragmatic understanding

Applied Psycholinguistics 32:4
Tare & Gelman: Bilingual interactions

777

and language awareness. Discussion about the nature of the two languages they
speak may enhance preschoolers' understanding that the label for an item is not
inextricably tied to the referent, which many researchers have examined in schoolaged bilingual children (Bialystok, 1988; Rosenblum & Pinker, 1983).
CONCLUSIONS

In the present study, bilingual parents demonstrated pragmatic sensitivity in the
presence of a third party, whereas their preschool-aged children did not. This
capacity is of particular significance because it reflects knowledge and awareness
of the linguistic limitations of the third party, and cannot be due to ongoing
linguistic cues or feedback (as the third-party bystander did not continually speak
in the interaction). Thus, bystanders provide a particularly valuable method to
examine the mechanisms by which bilingual children can (or cannot) demonstrate
pragmatic sensitivity. In future research, it would be useful to examine when in
development this sensitivity to a third-party speaker emerges.
Of further interest, many of the parents in our sample discussed language
differences with their children. It would be very interesting to examine whether
preschool-aged children whose parents engaged in more explicit metalinguistic
conversation perform better on metalinguistic tasks when they are older. Similarly,
parents who adjusted their language use more markedly may have children who
show greater pragmatic differentiation later on in development. These findings
may provide a technique and first step in investigating how individual differences
in bilingual children's experience may affect their pragmatic language use and
metalinguistic skills.

APPENDIX A
Example of coding of parent-child conversation excerpt (mother with older
male child)
MOT:
%eng:
Coded as:
CHI:
Coded as:
MOT:
%eng:
Coded as:
CHI:
Coded as:
MOT:
%eng:
Coded as:
CHI:

Hmm ani hai kai?
Hmm, and what's this?
Complete Marathi
Dog
Complete English; Child's First Label in English
Ani dogla kai mhantow Marathit tu?
And what do you call "dog" in Marathi?
Marathi with English Insertion (Quoting); Requests Translation;
Uses Name of Language
We call it as puppy
Complete English
Nahi nahi, apan kai mhantow Marathit?
No, no, what do we say in Marathi?
Complete Marathi; Requests Translation; Uses Name of Language
I don't know

Applied Psycholinguistics 32:4
Tare & Gelman: Bilingual interactions

Coded as:
MOT:
%eng:
Coded as:
MOT:
%eng:
Coded as:
CHI:
%eng:
Coded as:

778

Complete English
Kutra
Dog
Complete Marathi; Provides Translation Equivalent
Kai mhantow?
What is it called?
Complete Marathi; Requests Repetition of Translation
Kutra
Dog
Complete Marathi; Repeats Translation

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported by dissertation research grants from the University of Michigan
and the journal Language Learning (to M.T.) and NICHD Grant HD36043 (to S.G.). We
thank our parent and child participants and Michelle Housey, Ashwini Joshi, and Manasi
Khadilkar for research assistance. Portions of this research were presented at the 2008
Triennial Conference of the International Association for the Study of Child Language in
Edinburgh, Scotland, and the 2009 Biennial Conference of the Society for Research in
Child Development in Denver, CO.

REFERENCES
Akhtar, N. (2005). The robustness of learning through overhearing. Developmental Science, 8, 199-
209.
Au, T., & Glusman, M. (1990). The principle of mutual exclusivity in word learning: To honor or not
to honor? Child Development, 61, 1474-1490.
Bell, A. (1984). Language style as audience design. Language in Society, 13, 145-204.
Bialystok, E. (1988). Levels of bilingualism and levels of linguistic awareness. Developmental Psychology, 24, 560-567.
Bialystok, E. (2001). Bilingualism in development: Language, literacy, and cognition. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Callanan, M. A., & Sabbagh, M. A. (2004). Multiple labels for objects in conversations with young
children: Parents' language and children's developing expectations about word meanings.
Developmental Psychology, 40, 746-763.
Carlson, S. M., & Meltzoff, A. N. (2008). Bilingual experience and executive functioning in young
children. Developmental Science, 11, 282-298.
Comeau, L., & Genesee, F. (2001). Bilingual children's repair strategies during dyadic communication.
In J. Cenoz & F. Genesee (Eds.), Trends in bilingual acquisition (pp. 229-256). Amsterdam:
John Benjamins.
Comeau, L., Genesee, F., & Lapaquette, L. (2003). The modeling hypothesis and child bilingual
codemixing. International Journal of Bilingualism, 7, 113-126.
Comeau, L., Genesee, F., & Mendelson, M. (2007). Bilingual children's repairs of breakdowns in
communication. Journal of Child Language, 34, 159-174.
Cummins, J. (1978). Bilingualism and the development of metalinguistic awareness. Journal of CrossCultural Psychology, 9, 131-149.
De Houwer, A. (1990). The acquisition of two languages: A case study. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
De Houwer, A. 2009. Bilingual first language acquisition. Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
Deuchar, M., & Quay, S. (1999). Language choice in the earliest utterances: A case study with
methodological implications. Journal of Child Language, 26, 461-475.
Diesendruck, G. (2005). The principles of conventionality and contrast in word learning: An empirical
examination. Developmental Psychology, 41, 451-463.

Applied Psycholinguistics 32:4
Tare & Gelman: Bilingual interactions

779

Fenson, L., Dale, P. S., Reznick, J. S., Bates, E., Thal, D. J., & Pethick, S. J. (1994). Variability in early
communicative development. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development,
59(5, Serial No. 42), 1-173.
Fishman, J. A. (1991). Reversing language shift: Theoretical and empirical foundations of assistance
to threatened languages. Clevedon: Multilingual Mattters.
Galambos, S. J., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (1990). The effects of learning two languages on levels of
metalinguistic awareness. Cognition, 34, 1-56.
Genesee, F., Boivin, I., & Nicoladis, E. (1996). Talking with strangers: A study of bilingual children's
communicative competence. Applied Psycholinguistics, 17, 427-442.
Hakuta, K., & D'Andrea, D. (1992). Some properties of bilingual maintenance and loss in Mexican
background high-school students. Applied Linguistics, 13, 72-99.
Hart, B., & Risley, T. R. (1992). American parenting of language-learning children: Persisting differences in family-child interactions observed in natural home environments. Developmental
Psychology, 28, 1096-1105.
Huttenlocher, J., Vasilyeva, M., Cymerman, E., & Levine, S. (2002). Language input and child syntax.
Cognitive Psychology, 45, 337-374.
Ianco-Worrall, A. (1972). Bilingualism and cognitive development. Child Development, 43, 1390-
1400.
Kasuya, H. (1998). Determinants of language choice in bilingual children: The role of input. International Journal of Bilingualism, 2, 327-346.
Kasuya, H. (2002). Bilingual context for language development. In S. Blum-Kulka & C. E. Snow
(Eds.), Talking to adults: The contribution of multiparty discourse to language acquisition
(pp. 295-326). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Koppe, R., & Meisel, J. M. (1995). Code-switching in bilingual first language acquisition. In L.
Milroy & P. Muysken (Eds.), One speaker, two languages: Cross-disciplinary perspectives on
code-switching (pp. 276-301). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lanza, E. (2001). Bilingual first language acquisition: A discourse perspective on language contact
in parent-child interaction. In J. Cenoz & F. Genesee (Eds.), Trends in bilingual acquisition
(pp. 201-230). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Lanza, E. (2007). Multilingualism and the family. In P. Auer & L. Wei (Eds.), Handbook
of multilingualism and multilingual communication (pp. 45-67). Berlin: Mouton de
Gruyter.
MacWhinney, B., & Snow, C. (1990). The child language data exchange system: An update. Journal
of Child Language, 17, 457-472.
Malakoff, M., & Hakuta, K. (1991). Translation skill and metalinguistic awareness in bilinguals.
In E. Bialystok (Ed.), Language processing in bilingual children (pp. 141-166). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Montanari, S. (2009). Pragmatic differentiation in early trilingual development. Journal of Child
Language, 36, 597-627.
Muysken, P. (2000). Bilingual speech. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Muysken, P., Kook, H., & Vedder, P. (1996). Papiamento/Dutch code-switching in bilingual parent-
child reading. Applied Psycholinguistics, 17, 485-505.
Nicoladis, E., & Genesee, F. (1996). A longitudinal study of pragmatic differentiation in young bilingual
children. Language Learning, 46, 439-464.
Pan, B. A. (1995). Code negotiation in bilingual families: "My body starts speaking English." Journal
of Multilingual and Multicultural Development, 16, 315-327.
Pearson, B. Z. (2007). Social factors in childhood bilingualism in the United States. Applied Psycholinguistics, 28, 399-410.
Perez-Bazan, M. J. (2002, October). Family matters: Determiners of language choice in early bilingual
development. Paper presented at the Second University of Vigo International Symposium on
Bilingualism, Galicia, Spain.
Quay, S. (2008). Dinner conversations with a trilingual two-year-old: Language socialization in a
multilingual context. First Language, 28, 5-33.
Rosenblum, T., & Pinker, S. A. (1983). Word magic revisited: Monolingual and bilingual children's
understanding of the word-object relationship. Child Development, 54, 773-780.
Siegal, M., Iozzi, L., & Surian, L. (2009). Bilingualism and conversational understanding in young
children. Cognition, 110, 115-122.

Applied Psycholinguistics 32:4
Tare & Gelman: Bilingual interactions

780

Snow, C. E., & Ferguson, C. A. (1977). Talking to children: Language input and acquisition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Tare, M., & Gelman, S. A. (2010). Can you say it another way? Cognitive factors in bilingual children's
pragmatic language skills. Journal of Cognition and Development, 11, 137-158.
Vedder, P., Kook, H., & Muysken, P. (1996). Language choice and functional differentiation of languages in bilingual parent-child reading. Applied Psycholinguistics, 17, 461-484.
Wali, K. (2005). Marathi. Munich: LINCOM GmbH.

