Brain & Language 120 (2012) 187-207

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Brain & Language
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/b&l

Syntactic processing in the human brain: What we know, what we don't know,
and a suggestion for how to proceed
Evelina Fedorenko , Alfonso Nieto-Castanon, Nancy Kanwisher
McGovern Institute for Brain Research, MIT, 43 Vassar Street, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Accepted 5 January 2011
Available online 18 February 2011
Keywords:
Syntactic processing
Functional specificity
Functional localization
Functional regions of interest
Anatomical variability
fMRI

a b s t r a c t
For every claim in the neuroimaging literature about a particular brain region supporting syntactic processing, there exist other claims implicating the target region in different linguistic processes, and, in
many cases, in non-linguistic cognitive processes (e.g., Blumstein, 2009). We argue that traditional group
analysis methods in neuroimaging may obscure functional specificity because of inter-subject anatomical
variability (Fedorenko & Kanwisher, 2009). In Fedorenko, Hsieh, Nieto-Castanon, Whitfield-Gabrieli, and
Kanwisher (2010) we presented a functional localizer that allows quick and reliable identification of key
language-sensitive regions in each individual brain. This approach enables pooling data from corresponding functional regions across subjects rather than from the same locations in stereotaxic space that may
differ functionally due to inter-subject anatomical variability. In the current paper we demonstrate that
the individual-subjects functional localization approach is superior to the traditional methods in its ability to distinguish among conditions in a brain region's response. This ability is at the core of all neuroimaging research and is critical for answering questions of functional specialization (e.g., does a brain region
specialize for processing syntactic aspects of the linguistic signal), which is in turn essential for making
inferences about the precise computations conducted in each brain region. Based on our results, we argue
that supplementing existing methods with an individual-subjects functional localization approach may
lead to a clearer picture of the neural basis of syntactic processing, as it has in some other domains, such
as high-level vision (e.g., Kanwisher, 2010) and social cognition (e.g., Saxe & Kanwisher, 2003).
O 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction
Humans share with other species the ability to learn a mapping
between strings of sounds and meanings (e.g., Kaminski, Call, &
Fischer, 2004; Pepperberg, 2000; Savage-Rumbaugh et al., 1993).
However, only humans can (a) combine these lexical-level representations in novel ways in order to convey how objects relate to
one another in the world or to describe a state of one's own or another's mind, or (b) infer the relationships among elements in a
string of words (cf. Gentner, Fenn, Margoliash, & Nusbaum, 2006;
Ouattara, Lemasson, & Zuberbuhler, 2009). Because this ability -
syntactic processing - is one of the defining characteristics of our
species, scientists have long sought to understand the cognitive
and neural architecture of the system underlying it, as well as its
relationship to other human cognitive abilities. In the current paper, we focus on the neural machinery supporting syntactic processing, with a particular focus on investigations using functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), and we argue that a new

 Corresponding author. Address: MIT 46-4141C, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
E-mail address: evelina9@mit.edu (E. Fedorenko).
0093-934X/$ - see front matter O 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.bandl.2011.01.001

method - defining regions of interest functionally in individual
subjects and then rigorously investigating the functional properties of these regions - may be promising for future investigations
of this and related questions.
We begin with a brief summary of what is currently known
about the neural basis of syntactic processing from neuroimaging
studies, and we outline some of the questions that remain unresolved. We point out that all neuroimaging is premised on the ability to detect in the relevant brain region a differential response to
conditions that differ in the cognitive operations they entail, so
maximizing this ability (referred to here as ``functional selectivity'')
is of paramount importance in all functional imaging studies. We
argue that traditional group analysis methods based on voxels defined in a common stereotaxic space may obscure functional selectivity because subjects differ from each other anatomically. We
further argue that an individual-subjects functional localization
approach presents a powerful complement to these traditional
methods, and may lead to a clearer picture of the neural basis of
syntactic processing, as it has in some other domains, such as
high-level vision (e.g., Kanwisher, 2010) and social cognition
(e.g., Saxe & Kanwisher, 2003). In support of this position, we
directly compare the individual-subjects functional localization

188

E. Fedorenko et al. / Brain & Language 120 (2012) 187-207

approach to the traditional approaches with respect to their functional selectivity, using a dataset from Fedorenko et al. (2010). We
focus on regions that have been argued to be engaged in syntactic
processing based on previous studies. Based on the higher selectivity observed in functionally defined subject-specific regions of
interest (ROIs) compared to several kinds of standard group ROIs,1
we conclude that functional localization in individual subjects holds
promise for understanding the neural basis of language.

1.1. The neural basis of syntactic processing: What we know and what
we don't know
Several brain regions have been consistently implicated in
structural processing. We here briefly review the main candidates
(see e.g., Kaan and Swaab (2002), Friederici and Kotz (2003),
Grodzinsky and Friederici (2006), Bornkessel-Schlesewsky and
Friederici (2007) and Caplan (2007), for reviews).
In a seminal finding, Carramazza and Zurif (1976) demonstrated
that Broca's agrammatic aphasics have difficulty interpreting
structures where the order of the noun phrases does not correspond to the typical order of thematic roles in English (for example,
reversible passives like The girl was chased by the boy, where the
sentence-initial noun phrase the girl occupies the position of a typical agent but is assigned the patient role by the verb phrase). Ever
since this discovery, Broca's area has been a focus of investigations
of syntactic processing. The traditional definition of this region includes opercular and triangular portions of the left inferior frontal
gyrus, IFG (cf. Lindenberg, Fangerau, & Seitz, 2007, for an extensive
discussion of the variability in what researchers refer to as ``Broca's
area'' across neuroimaging studies). Regions in/around the left IFG
have indeed been shown to respond more strongly to syntactically
complex sentences across a number of studies (e.g., Ben-Shachar,
Hendler, Kahn, Ben-Bashat, & Grodzinsky, 2003; Ben-Shachar, Palti,
& Grodzinsky, 2004; Friederici, Fiebach, Schlesewsky, Bornkessel, &
von Cramon, 2006; Grewe et al., 2005; Santi & Grodzinsky, 2007;
Stromswold, Caplan, Alpert, & Rauch, 1996). However, other studies have implicated these regions in lexico-semantic processing
(e.g., Hagoort, Baggio, & Willems, 2009; Hagoort, Hald, Bastiaansen,
& Petersson, 2004; Rodd, Davis, & Johnsrude, 2005; Schnur et al.,
2009) and phonological processing (e.g., Blumstein, Myers, &
Rissman, 2005; Myers, Blumstein, Walsh, & Eliassen, 2009). Some
have claimed that different portions of the left IFG support
different aspects of linguistic processing (e.g., Buckner, Raichle, &
Petersen, 1995; Fiez, 1997; Poldrack et al., 1999; Bokde, Tagamets,
Friedman, & Horwitz, 2001; Burton, 2001, 2009; Dapretto &
Bookheimer, 1999; Devlin, Matthews, & Rushworth, 2003; Gough,
Nobre, & Devlin, 2005; Costafreda et al., 2006; Santi & Grodzinsky,
2007; Heim, Eickhoff, & Amunts, 2009), or even different aspects of
syntactic processing (e.g., Friederici et al., 2006), but no consensus
has yet been reached about what the relevant divisions are and
what cognitive function(s) each sub-region supports (cf. alternative accounts that postulate broader cognitive functions to account
for a range of findings; e.g., Novick, Trueswell, & Thompson-Schill,
2005; Duncan, 2001, 2010; Badre & D'Esposito, 2009).
Posterior temporal regions (posterior superior temporal gyrus/
sulcus, STG/STS) have also been implicated in syntactic processing
(e.g., Constable et al., 2004; Cooke et al., 2002; Hasson, Nusbaum, &
Small, 2006; Schlesewsky & Bornkessel, 2004). Grodzinsky and
Friederici (2006) in a recent review hypothesize that these regions
may be critical for integrating incoming elements into the evolving
structure. However, other studies have observed activations in
these regions for non-syntactic language tasks (e.g., Graves,
1
Throughout the paper, we use the term ``standard group ROIs'' to refer to cases
where the same set of voxels in stereotaxic space is used across subjects.

Grabowski, Mehta, & Gupta, 2008; Hickok, Okada, & Serences,
2009; Noppeney, Phillips, & Price, 2004).
Another region that has been reported in a few studies to be
sensitive to syntactic processing is located in the left anterior temporal lobe (ATL). For example, Noppeney and Price (2004) observed
a decreased response in this region when participants read sentences with similar structures (see Friederici, Ruschenmeyer,
Hahne, & Fiebach, 2003; Friederici, Wang, Herrmann, Maess, &
Oertel, 2000a; Humphries, Binder, Medler, & Liebenthal, 2006;
Humphries, Love, Swinney, & Hickok, 2005; Rogalsky & Hickok,
2009, among others). However, as with the other regions, syntactic
processing is not the only cognitive function that has been observed to activate ATL structures. For example, Patterson, Nestor,
and Rogers (2007) have argued that these structures support amodal conceptual representations, although some (e.g., Humphries,
Willard, Buchsbaum, & Hickok, 2001) have argued that these regions are more engaged during sentence understanding than
non-linguistic conceptual processing.
In summary, each of the regions that have been implicated in
syntactic processing (including the regions mentioned above as
well as some other ones) has also been implicated in other linguistic functions. Moreover, most of these regions have also been
implicated in a variety of non-linguistic functions (e.g., see Duncan
(2001, 2010), Lindenberg et al. (2007), Badre and D'Esposito (2009),
Fadiga, Craighero, and D'Ausilio (2009), for reviews of tasks that
activate lateral frontal cortices; see Hein and Knight (2008), for a
review of tasks that activate STS/STG regions; see Olson, Plotzker,
and Ezzyat (2007), for a review of findings on the role of left temporal pole structures in social/emotional processing). This situation
has recently been synopsized in a review by Blumstein (2009), as
follows: ``The functional properties of language, that is, speech, lexical processing, and syntactic processing, appear not to be focally
represented in one area of the brain; rather, each recruits a broadly
distributed neural network or processing stream. Moreover, certain
areas of the brain that have been associated with language processing appear to be recruited across cognitive domains, suggesting
that while language may be functionally special, it draws on at
least some neural mechanisms and computational properties
shared across other cognitive domains.''
In order to claim that a particular brain region R supports a particular cognitive function, it is necessary not only to formulate predictions about the kinds of cognitive operations that should result
in activity in region R, but also to be able to explain why other
kinds of cognitive operations result in activity in region R.
Researchers usually take one of two approaches (see e.g., a recent
debate between Grodzinsky and Santi (2008), and Willems and
Hagoort (2009), in TiCS, for an illustration): (1) they focus on the
cognitive function that is of most interest to them (e.g., syntactic
processing) and do not attempt to reconcile their findings with
contradictory findings from other studies, sometimes dismissing
them on the grounds of methodological flaws or slightly different
loci of the peaks of activations; or (2) they attempt to provide a
unifying account that can explain all the available data. For example, as mentioned above, some researchers have explicitly argued
that the left inferior frontal brain regions that have been implicated
in syntactic processing are more functionally general. For example,
Hagoort and colleagues (e.g., Hagoort et al., 2009) have put forward
the semantic unification proposal, whereby the left IFG is responsible for constructing complex meanings out of simpler meaning
units. Thompson-Schill and colleagues (Novick et al., 2005; Snyder,
Feigenson, & Thompson-Schill, 2007; Thompson-Schill, 2005; see
also Badre & Wagner, 2007) have argued that this region is critical
for cognitive control abilities that are required to select the relevant representation among multiple competing representations.
And Duncan (Duncan, 2001, 2010; see also Miller & Cohen, 2001)
has argued that neurons located on the lateral surface of the frontal

E. Fedorenko et al. / Brain & Language 120 (2012) 187-207

lobes are general-purpose problem solvers and can be used to perform a wide range of goal-directed cognitive tasks.
To summarize, no brain region has so far been convincingly
demonstrated to be selectively engaged in syntactic processing or
a component thereof. This may be because such regions do not exist. In particular, it is possible that all the regions that support syntactic processing support other, linguistic or non-linguistic,
functions. However, we believe that current methods may be
obscuring the true functional architecture, whatever that may be,
as argued next.
1.2. Potential limitations of the current methods and a possible
solution
All neuroimaging methods depend fundamentally on the ability
to detect in some region of the brain a differential response between conditions that differ in the cognitive operations they involve. The current standard practice in the field of neuroimaging
of language entails performing a random effects analysis on the
data with the activations reported in stereotaxic coordinates
(e.g., Talairach or MNI). The main way to compare results across
studies is to compare the locations of activations (often represented by activation peaks) in stereotaxic space. The most systematic comparisons involve meta-analyses of activation peaks from
large numbers of studies (e.g., Bookheimer, 2002; Costafreda
et al., 2006; Indefrey & Levelt, 2004; Kaan & Swaab, 2002;
Lindenberg et al., 2007; Poldrack et al., 1999; Vigneau et al.,
2006). The basic premise of these kinds of comparisons is that
functional organization is sufficiently related to stereotaxic space,
that this space provides a common ground for comparing results
across studies, which is essential for accumulating knowledge
about the functional architecture of the language system. However,
because of inter-subject anatomical variability, functional regions
may fall in different locations in stereotaxic space (see Saxe, Brett,
and Kanwisher (2006) and Fedorenko and Kanwisher (2009), for
reviews of the relevant literature and discussions of this and
related issues). As a result, the responses across subjects extracted
from the same location in stereotaxic space may underestimate
selectivity of the underlying brain tissue.
Inter-subject anatomical variability has consequences for both
voxel-based and standard-group-ROI-based analyses (where a
fixed ROI, expressed as a set of voxels in stereotaxic space, is used
across subjects; this includes both anatomically defined ROIs and
functionally defined ROIs, or fROIs). In voxel-based analyses some
subjects may not show an effect in a particular voxel. As a result,
voxels that show an effect in only a small proportion of the subjects may not be detected, and in the voxels that do emerge, selectivity may be underestimated because averaging will include some
subjects who do not show the effect (see also Appendix A). Similarly, in standard-group-ROI-based analyses individual subjects'
activations may fall in slightly different locations relative to the
ROI volume (which is fixed across subjects in common stereotaxic
coordinates). As a result, selectivity may be underestimated because in each subject the ROI will include some voxels that do
not show the effect.
The solution we offered in Fedorenko and Kanwisher (2009) involves functional localization of language-sensitive cortex in individual subjects (see Ben-Shachar et al., 2004; January, Trueswell, &
Thompson-Schill, 2009; Neville et al., 1998; Rogalsky & Hickok,
2000, among others, for earlier attempts to use individual subjects'
activation maps in the analyses). This approach consists of two
steps. First, a contrast aimed at the cognitive process of interest
is used to identify regions - in each individual brain - that support
the relevant cognitive process. For example, a contrast between
faces and objects is used to identify regions that are engaged to a
larger extent in face processing than in object processing more

189

generally (Kanwisher, McDermott, & Chun, 1997). And second,
hypotheses about the functions of these regions are tested by
examining the response of these regions to various new conditions
of interest.
In Fedorenko et al. (2010), we presented a localizer task that
functionally identifies key language-sensitive regions in individual
brains in a tractably short period of scanning (15-20 min). We
used a contrast between sentences and pronounceable nonwords.
This contrast targets brain regions engaged in processing wordand sentence-level meaning and should therefore include regions
supporting lexico-semantic and syntactic processing. We demonstrated that a number of regions (including the ``classical'' regions
in the left frontal and left temporo-parietal cortices) - each present
in at least 80% of individual subjects - show a reliably stronger response to sentences than to nonwords. This response (a) replicates
within and between subjects, (b) generalizes across different sets
of materials and different tasks (see Osterhout, Allen, McLaughlin,
& Inoue, 2002, for evidence of task-independence in ERPs; cf.
Meyer, Friederici, & von Cramon, 2000; Plante, Creusere, & Sabin,
2002; Wright, Randall, Marslen-Wilson, & Tyler, 2010, among others, for evidence of task effects observed with linguistic materials
in fMRI studies), and (c) generalizes from the visual to the auditory
modality (see also Bedny, Dodell-Feder, Pascual-Leone, Fedorenko,
& Saxe, in press), although some regions do show an overall stronger response to visual or auditory stimuli (see Fig. 8 in Fedorenko
et al., 2010; see also Carpentier et al., 2001; Constable et al.,
2004; Michael, Keller, Carpenter, & Just, 2001, for earlier investigations of modality effects in language processing; cf. Osterhout &
Holcomb, 1993, for ERP evidence of similar responses to high-level
linguistic manipulations across modalities). The ability to identify a
set of regions in each individual brain in a short scan opens the
door to a research program characterizing the response profiles
of these regions in detail by examining their responses to various
linguistic and non-linguistic manipulations, including investigations of questions concerning the role of these regions in syntactic
processing (see Section 5 for a discussion of advantages and potential limitations of this method).
In order to make a convincing case for this approach, however,
it is necessary not only to demonstrate its feasibility as we have
done in Fedorenko et al. (2010), but also to show how it compares
to existing approaches. This is the aim of the current paper. In particular, we evaluate whether selectivity - which is critical for dissociating responses of a brain region to different stimuli/tasks - is
indeed higher in subject-specific fROIs than in several kinds of
standard group ROIs defined using traditional stereotaxic-spacebased methods.
1.3. Selectivity
Throughout the paper, we use the term selectivity to characterize the degree to which different conditions are distinguished in a
region's response. This represents a property of a region, and it is
related to our ability to perform reverse inferences, i.e., inferring
a particular cognitive process or computation from activation
within a region (Poldrack, 2006). We also talk about the selectivity
of a method when discussing the ability of a method to appropriately characterize brain regions in terms of stimuli/tasks that these
regions respond to vs. do not respond to.
Formally, selectivity refers to the ability to detect an effect A
while discriminating against a non-present effect B:

S 1/4 bA  1  aB 

1

where bA represents the sensitivity (power) to detect effect A at a
false positive level a. This selectivity measure represents the joint
probability of detecting an effect A which is present (the true positive rate for effect A) while not detecting an effect B which is not

190

E. Fedorenko et al. / Brain & Language 120 (2012) 187-207

present (the true negative rate for a null effect B). This selectivity
measure is also known as the area under the curve (AUC), representing the area under the receiver operating characteristic (ROC)
curve, and characterizing the discrimination ability of a statistical
test (see Appendix A for a demonstration of how an increase in
the size of the sample does not lead to an increase in selectivity,
but rather decreases it).
As is clear from Eq. (1) above, higher selectivity results from
maximizing the likelihood of true positives (finding an effect when
it is really present, i.e., sensitivity in the traditional statistics terminology) while minimizing the likelihood of false positives (not
finding an effect when it is not present, i.e., specificity in the traditional statistics terminology).
We use effect sizes (i.e., percent BOLD signal differences) as an
indicator of a method's selectivity. Effect sizes are important in
understanding the functional architecture of a system, because
they relate to the notion of ``theoretical'' significance (beyond the
level of statistical significance). For example, if a region responds
higher to one stimulus than another, but the difference between
the means for these two conditions is very small, it is unclear
how theoretically significant such a difference is (see Kanwisher,
2010, for a discussion of theoretical vs. statistical significance).
We chose to use raw (unstandardized) effect sizes for two reasons. First, standardized measures of effect size (such as Cohen's d
or Hedge's g) are more commonly used when the metrics of the
measures being studied do not have an intrinsic meaning. However, percent BOLD signal differences are meaningful in the sense
that they are related to the amount of neural activity (despite
many ambiguities about the precise kind of neural activity entailed). And second, even more importantly, differences in standardized measures have two possible interpretations: the
differences could be due to (1) differences in (unstandardized)
effect sizes (what we are reporting in the paper), and/or (2) differences in standard deviations of the data across the different
methods. This latter difference is more difficult to interpret. In particular, we are arguing that the underlying BOLD signal differences
for each subject are being underestimated when group (fixed) ROIs
are used, due to inter-subject variability in the loci of activation,
which leads to averaging - in any given subject - over voxels that
show a strong effect and voxels that do not. Our direct comparison
of the methods based on their unstandardized effect size contrast
differences better reflects this underestimation thereby providing
a stronger rationale for using subject-specific fROIs. (For completeness, we also provide the standardized effect size measures in
Appendix G.)
Underestimating selectivity has important consequences for
investigations of the functional architecture of the language system. If the method we are advocating has higher selectivity, then
it has a potential to reveal functional architecture that may be
invisible or diminished when less selective (i.e., group-based)
methods are used. For example, underestimating the selectivity
of regions supporting syntactic processing may lead to wrong conclusions about (a) within-language specificity (i.e., specificity for
syntax vs. other aspects of language), (b) domain specificity (i.e.,
specificity for syntax vs. non-linguistic cognitive processes), and,
consequently, (c) the linguistic (or other) computations conducted
in these regions.

2. General methods
In this section, we (a) describe the dataset that we'll be using for
all the method comparisons presented here, and (b) provide a summary of the individual-subjects functional localization method that
we recently developed. Other aspects of the methods, relevant to
specific method comparisons, will be described in later sections.

2.1. The dataset
In the current paper we use a dataset (25 subjects) from a fourcondition experiment, which used a blocked design and included
sentences, word lists, jabberwocky sentences and pronounceable
nonword lists (see e.g., Cutting et al., 2006; Friederici, Meyer, &
von Cramon, 2000b; Hagoort et al., 1999; Heim et al., 2005;
Humphries, Binder, Medler, & Liebenthal, 2007; Humphries et al.,
2006; Indefrey et al., 2001; Mazoyer et al., 1993; Petersen, Fox,
Snyder, & Raichle, 1990; Vandenberghe, Nobre, & Price, 2002, for
studies using similar contrasts in traditional group-based
investigations).2,3
The sentences were 12 or 8 words long (two different sets of
materials were used across two subsets of subjects to ensure generalizability across different sets of materials) and were created so
as to include a variety of syntactic constructions. The word lists
were created by scrambling the words across sets of sentences,
so that ``reconstructing'' a sentence out of individual words in a
word list was not possible. The jabberwocky sentences were created by replacing the content words (nouns, verbs, adjectives and
adverbs) in the sentences by pronounceable nonwords that were
matched to the words in length (in letters and syllables) and bigram letter frequency. Finally, the nonword lists were created by
scrambling the nonwords across sets of jabberwocky sentences
in a similar way to how words were scrambled in the word lists
condition.
The largest contrast (sentences > nonwords) was used in
Fedorenko et al. (2010) as the localizer contrast to define
subject-specific functional ROIs. The word list and jabberwocky
conditions were included in order to take a preliminary look at
the question of whether any of the fROIs show a dissociation
between syntactic and lexico-semantic processing.

2.2. The method: subject-specific functional ROIs
A detailed description of the method that we developed for
defining subject-specific fROIs can be found in Fedorenko et al.
(2010). We here provide a summary.
Because activations in many language tasks (including our
localizer contrast) are quite distributed, the traditional subjectspecific fROI definition procedure (e.g., Kanwisher et al., 1997;
Tootell et al., 1995), where each individual map for the contrast
of interest is examined and subsets of voxels are hand-selected,
guided by macroanatomic landmarks, does not seem appropriate.
Looking at the individual activation maps for various language
tasks, it is often difficult to decide where the borders of a region
are in any given brain, or what part of the activation counts as
the ``same'' functional region across two brains. In order to reduce
the potential subjectivity present in the traditional fROI definition
procedure, we developed a novel method of fROI selection: Groupconstrained Subject-Specific (GSS4) method.
In the GSS method, a set of thresholded activation maps from
individual subjects are overlaid on top of one another. The topographical information in the resulting probabilistic overlap map
2
The main results from this dataset are reported in Fedorenko et al. (2010).
Detailed descriptions of the materials, procedure and other aspects of the experiment
can be found there. The complete set of materials is available from http://
web.mit.edu/evelina9/www/funcloc/.
3
This dataset contains data from two experiments with the same design. In the
first experiment (n = 12) participants were engaged in a passive reading task, and in
the second experiment (n = 13), in addition to the reading task, participants had to
report whether a memory probe (word/nonword) that appeared after each sentence /
word list / jabberwocky sentence / nonword list was present in the immediately
preceding string. Because the results from the two experiments were similar, we
collapsed the data in Fedorenko et al. (2010) and in the current paper.
4
This method was originally introduced with the abbreviation ``GcSS''.

E. Fedorenko et al. / Brain & Language 120 (2012) 187-207

191

Fig. 1. Two sample fROIs (Left IFG and Left MFG) in six sample subjects. The borders of the group-level partitions are shown with a black outline and the subject-specific
activations are shown in red.

is then used to divide the activation landscape into ``partitions''
(using an image parcellation algorithm) by identifying points of
high inter-subject overlap and allowing for variation of individual
activations around these high overlap points. In the critical step,
the resulting group-level functional partitions are used to constrain the selection of voxels in individual subjects, i.e., individual
subjects' fROIs are defined by taking the intersection of the partitions and individual subjects' thresholded activation maps. In the
current version of the procedure, no constraints, such as e.g., contiguity, are placed on an individual subject's voxels that fall within
the borders of any given partition (future work may include refinements to this procedure). Fig. 1 illustrates this intersection procedure for a few sample subjects for two sample partitions (see
http://web.mit.edu/evelina9/www/funcloc/funcloc_GcSS_analysisflow.html, for a schematic illustration of all the steps). Having
intersected the partitions with individual subjects' activation
maps, we selected a subset of ``meaningful'' fROIs that (1) are present in at least 80% of individual subjects, (2) show replicable responses within subjects and similar responses across subjects,
and (3) respond more strongly to sentences than nonwords regardless of whether the stimuli are presented visually or auditorily (see
Appendix B for a map showing the key group-level partitions identified in Fedorenko et al., 2010; these partitions, as well as an SPM
toolbox for performing GSS analyses, are available for download
from http://web.mit.edu/evelina9/www/funcloc/).5
Unlike the traditional group analyses based on the notion of inter-subject overlap at the voxel level, this method enables us to detect individual subjects' activations that may land in similar but
5
The brain regions identified with our localizer contrast are largely consistent with
previous studies that have shown that left lateral frontal and temporal / temporoparietal regions respond strongly to sentence stimuli, and also more strongly to more
linguistically rich stimuli (e.g., sentences) than to less linguistically rich stimuli (e.g.,
word lists or jabberwocky) (e.g., Indefrey et al., 2001; Humphries et al., 2007).
However, the results of one study (Friederici et al., 2000b) are not consistent with our
findings. In particular, Friederici et al. (2000b) failed to observe stronger activation in
the left frontal regions for sentences relative to word lists, jabberwocky sentences,
and nonword lists. It is unclear what the source of this discrepancy is. Because we (see
also Bedny et al., in press) have now replicated the response profiles in the frontal and
temporal regions across several studies (consistently finding the strongest response
to sentences, weaker response to words and jabberwocky, and the weakest response
to nonwords) and because these findings are also consistent with several other
published reports, we think that the results reported in Friederici et al., 2000b are
either not robust and therefore not replicated in similar studies, or are due to some
study-specific properties which are different from all the other studies, although
nothing stands out as an apparent difference based on a careful reading of the
methods section of Friederici et al., 2000b.

largely/completely non-overlapping locations within a spatially
constrained volume.

3. Results: Selectivity of GSS fROIs vs. standard group ROIs
For all of these analyses, we use the dataset from Fedorenko
et al. (2010), described in Section 2.2. We extract the responses
to the four conditions (sentences, words, jabberwocky and nonwords) from the different kinds of ROIs and compare the effect
sizes observed in these ROIs for several key contrasts to those observed in our GSS fROIs (defined as described in Section 2.2).
We focus on three contrasts relevant to syntactic processing: (1)
sentences > nonwords (our localizer contrast), (2) sentences > words, and (3) jabberwocky > nonwords. The effect sizes
for these contrasts tell us how well the relevant pairs of conditions
are distinguished in a region's response (e.g., the size of the sentences > words effect tells us how well sentences and word lists
are differentiated). Although none of these contrasts are designed
to isolate syntactic processing exclusively, under any account of
syntactic processing sentences should elicit a higher response than
pronounceable nonwords and than words in regions supporting
syntactic processing. Furthermore, according to most accounts,
jabberwocky sentences should elicit a higher response than pronounceable nonwords because in the former but not in the latter,
the order of nonwords, as well as the presence of function words
in grammar-appropriate locations and functional morphology allows combining nonwords into more complex representations.6
The goal of the current investigation is not to answer the question of whether any brain regions specialize for syntax vs. other
linguistic processes and vs. non-linguistic functions. This is a hard
question that will require dozens of studies. What we do here is
establish the individual-subjects functional localization approach
as a method that's optimally suited for answering this question
eventually. In particular, we show this method's superior ability
6
It is worth noting that even if these conditions are met (i.e., the response to
sentences is higher than to words and to nonwords, and the response to jabberwocky
is higher than to nonwords), additional tests would then be required to better
understand the role of the region in question in structural processing. Furthermore, in
order to argue that a region is selectively engaged in syntactic processing, additional
tests would be necessary to (a) demonstrate that this region is not engaged in other
linguistic processes (e.g., phonological, semantic or discourse-level processes), and (b)
demonstrate that this region is only sensitive to processing structure in language but
not in other stimuli that may share some properties with language (e.g., music or
action planning).

192

E. Fedorenko et al. / Brain & Language 120 (2012) 187-207

- relative to traditional, group-based, methods - to distinguish
among conditions in a region's response (e.g., distinguishing between sentences and word lists). This ability is essential for
addressing questions of functional specialization, which in turn
lays the groundwork for understanding the computations performed by each brain region. (See Section 5 for other advantages
that the individual-subjects functional localization method provides over the traditional group-based methods.)
We begin, in Section 3.1, by comparing the effect sizes in our
subject-specific fROIs to those in standard group ROIs defined
around activation peaks that have been argued to represent regions engaged in syntactic processing in several previously published studies. In Section 3.2, we examine the effect sizes in our
subject-specific fROIs in relation to fROIs defined based on the
group analysis of the same data. Finally, in Section 3.3, we examine
two of our subject-specific fROIs (located in the left IFG) in relation
to two anatomical ROIs: Brodmann areas (BAs) 44 and 45, defined
using probabilistic cytoarchitectonic maps (Amunts et al., 1999).
As discussed in Section 1, the left IFG (including BAs 44 and 45)
is among the regions most frequently implicated in syntactic processing and is therefore of relevance here.
3.1. GSS fROIs vs. ROIs defined around activation peaks from the
literature
3.1.1. Methods
In order to perform a relatively large-scale assessment of the
selectivity of syntax-sensitive regions reported in the literature,
we chose to work with ROIs defined around activation peaks from
a recent meta-analysis (Vigneau et al., 2006). Vigneau and colleagues examined activation peaks from a set of 129 studies. They
classified these peaks (a total of 729 peaks) into three broad categories: peaks reported for tasks involving phonological processing,
peaks reported for tasks involving semantic processing, and - of
most interest here - peaks reported for tasks involving syntactic/
sentence-level processing (see Vigneau et al., 2006, p. 1415, for a
description of the classification procedure). 160 of the 729 peaks
were classified as syntactic/sentence-level peaks. These 160 peaks
were further classified into five sub-categories based on the type of
contrast used: (1) text comprehension (42 peaks), (2) sentencelevel comprehension (72 peaks), (3) syntactic processing (43
peaks), (4) sentence completion (1 peak), and (5) mental imagery
(2 peaks). The most relevant here is the third sub-category, which,
for the most part, includes contrasts between more vs. less structurally complex sentences. (The other four sub-categories are less
theoretically coherent, including a wide range of tasks involving
sentences and texts.) In particular, most of these studies investigated constructions that either did or did not contain long-distance
dependencies between words (e.g., Ben-Shachar et al., 2004;
Constable et al., 2004; Cooke et al., 2002; Stromswold et al.,
1996). Long-distance dependencies have been shown to lead to processing difficulty, compared to local dependencies, across a wide
range of behavioral measures (e.g., Ford, 1983; Gibson, 1998;
Gordon, Hendrick, & Johnson, 2001; Holmes & O'Regan, 1981; King
& Just, 1991). Because it is possible to match constructions involving local vs. non-local dependencies for lexico-semantic properties,
contrasts between them are commonly used to isolate syntactic
processing or syntactic working memory in behavioral, neuropsychological and neuroimaging investigations.
To perform the analyses in this section, we first (a) defined
spherical ROIs (6 mm in diameter) around each of the 43 syntactic
peaks, and (b) extracted the response to the four conditions (sentences, words, jabberwocky and nonwords) from our dataset. We
then selected the subset of these peaks that fell within one of
our group-level partitions so that the data from these peaks would
be comparable to the data from our new method. That constituted

29 peaks across 6 partitions (note that Vigneau et al. included only
peaks in the left hemisphere in their meta-analysis). Finally, for
each relevant partition, we compared the effect sizes in the ROIs
defined around the syntactic peaks to those in the corresponding
GSS fROI. We did this for each of our three contrasts: sentences > nonwords, sentences > words, and jabberwocky > nonwords. Before presenting the results, it is worth noting that these
selectivity comparisons err on the conservative side because all
the functional runs were used when estimating the responses in
the peak-defined ROIs, whereas only the first run was used when
estimating the response in GSS fROIs (the other runs were used
for defining the ROIs).
3.1.2. Results
Across the three contrasts (sentences > nonwords, sentences > words, and jabberwocky > nonwords) and across different
brain regions, the selectivity is higher in the fROIs defined with our
GSS method than in nearby group ROIs defined around peak coordinates in stereotaxic space reported in earlier studies on syntactic
processing. In particular, the differences in the magnitude of response to the conditions forming the contrasts above (e.g., the difference between the response to sentences and the response to
word lists) are larger in the GSS fROIs compared to peak-defined
group ROIs. The results are exemplified in Fig. 2 for two sample regions (see Appendix C, for a full set of detailed plots).
To quantify these differences in effect sizes, we used a Wilcoxon
signed rank one-sided test comparing the GSS fROI effect size value
to the corresponding distribution of peak-defined ROIs' effect size
values. The results are summarized in Table 1. In three of the regions (IFG, IFGorb and MidPostTemp) the GSS fROI effect size is
reliably higher than those of the peak-defined ROIs across all three
contrasts. In the PostTemp region, the GSS fROI effect size is marginally higher than those of the peak-defined ROIs across the three
contrasts. And in the remaining two regions (MFG and AntTemp)
the effect size is only numerically higher, plausibly not reaching
significance due a small number of peak-defined ROIs in those
partitions.
In summary, these results demonstrate that GSS fROIs are more
functionally selective than ROIs defined around activation peaks
reported for syntactic contrasts in the previous literature. This
was true across all three contrasts that involve syntactic processing. These results therefore suggest that analyses relying on GSS
fROIs are promising for investigating questions of the functional
architecture of the language system as they have more power to
detect effects if they are present and to distinguish among conditions that are actually different.
3.2. GSS fROIs vs. standard group fROIs (defined in the same dataset)
3.2.1. Methods
In this section, we compare the selectivity of our GSS fROIs to
that of fROIs defined based on traditional random-effects group
analysis maps in the same subjects. For both kinds of ROIs, we used
all but the first functional run in each subject to define the ROIs,
and then extracted the responses from the first functional run,
i.e., from a subset of the data that was not used for ROI definition
(e.g., Kriegeskorte, Simmons, Bellgowan, & Baker, 2009; Vul &
Kanwisher, 2009). To define our GSS fROIs, we intersected grouplevel partitions (see Appendix B) with individual subjects' activation maps for the sentences > nonwords contrast, as discussed in
Section 2.2 and illustrated - for two sample partitions and six sample subjects - in Fig. 1 above. To define standard group fROIs, we
intersected group-level partitions with the random-effects group
analysis map for the same contrast (again, using all but the first
functional run). Critically, in the group fROI analyses the same
set of voxels in stereotaxic space was used for all subjects (i.e.,

193

E. Fedorenko et al. / Brain & Language 120 (2012) 187-207

Fig. 2. Effect size comparisons between GSS fROIs (darker bars) and the ROIs defined around the syntactic activation peaks from several previously published studies that fell
within the borders of the corresponding group-level partitions (lighter bars) for the sentences > nonwords contrast (black and grey bars), sentences > words contrast (pink
bars), and jabberwocky > nonwords contrast (blue bars), for two sample regions (Left IFG and Left MidPostTemp).

Table 1
Results of Wilcoxon signed rank tests comparing the effect size values between GSS fROIs and peak-defined ROIs located within the corresponding partition.
fROI

Number of peaks within partition

Sentences > nonwords

Sentences > words

Jabberwocky > nonwords

Left frontal regions

IFG
IFGorb
MFG

9
7
2

<.005
<.01
n.s.

<.005
<.05
n.s.

<.005
<.01
n.s.

Left posterior regions

AntTemp
MidPostTemp
PostTemp

1
6
4

n.s.
<.05
.06

n.s.
<.05
.06

n.s.
<.05
.06

the voxels that emerged in the group analysis for the sentences > nonwords contrast and fell within the borders of each relevant partition), whereas our method allows different voxels in
stereotaxic space for each individual subject.
As discussed in Fedorenko et al. (2010), it is not obvious that the
GSS fROIs would outperform group fROIs in this comparison. In
particular, because the random-effects group fROIs include voxels
that behave most consistently across participants, it is possible
that these voxels would be most functionally selective. Therefore,
the selectivity of group fROIs may be predicted a priori to be at
least as high as that of subject-specific fROIs. This is not, however,
what the results show. In Fedorenko et al. (2010) we already reported the results for the sentences > nonwords contrast. For each
of the twelve regions we observed a reliably higher selectivity for
the GSS fROIs compared to the group fROI. Here, we examined
the selectivity of the GSS fROIs and group fROIs for the two functionally narrower contrasts that are relevant to syntactic processing: sentences > words, and jabberwocky > nonwords.

3.2.2. Results
For each of the three contrasts across brain regions, the selectivity was higher in GSS fROIs than in group fROIs (p-values < .0001).
Looking at the individual regions, we see that numerically the effect is larger in GSS fROIs, compared to group fROIs, in every single
region across the three contrasts. These results are presented in
Fig. 3 (the results for the sentences > nonwords contrast are the
same as those reported in Fedorenko et al., 2010, and are presented
here for completeness). Moreover, in most of the regions, these differences in effect size values between GSS fROIs and group fROIs
are significant (for example, we see a highly reliable difference
across all three contrasts in the Left IFG and Left MidPostTemp regions). These results are summarized in Table 2. These results reflect the fact that in group ROIs, for each subject the averaging

includes some voxels that are not significant in that subject, due
to inter-subject variability in the precise locations of activations.
Although the contrasts discussed here (sentences > nonwords,
sentences > words, and jabberwocky > nonwords) are significant
in most of the group ROIs, it is important to understand that smaller effect sizes mean that it would be generally more difficult to detect these (and other similar-size) effects. For example, while our
dataset includes 25 subjects, typical imaging experiments where
standard group analyses are used include on the order of 14-18
subjects. Therefore, some of these effects may not be detectable
in such studies.
It is also worth noting that apart from the fact that GSS fROIs are
characterized by higher selectivity, there is some variability among
the regions in how selective they are (this variability is present in
both GSS fROIs and group fROIs, but it is more pronounced in GSS
fROIs, plausibly because the selectivity is overall higher allowing
for more variation). Given how important selectivity of different
brain regions is for understanding the neural architecture underlying human cognition, an interesting future line of research could be
aimed at exploring this variability. In particular, understanding
what properties of a region (such as e.g., its size, location in the
brain, or spatial variability across subjects) predict the size of the
effects observed in that region for various tasks may provide
important insights. (For example, it is possible that language-sensitive regions located in the left hemisphere would show consistently larger effect sizes for language tasks than those in the
right hemisphere.) In Appendix D we present some preliminary
explorations of this question.

3.3. GSS fROIs vs. anatomical ROIs (BAs 44 and 45)
In this section, we compare two of our left frontal GSS fROIs
(Left IFG and Left IFGorb) to two anatomical ROIs. In particular,

194

E. Fedorenko et al. / Brain & Language 120 (2012) 187-207

Effect size (%BOLD signal change)

(a) Left frontal regions
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

Left AntTemp

Left MidAntTemp Left MidPostTemp

Left PostTemp

Left AngG

Effect size (%BOLD signal change)

(b) Left posterior regions
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

Right MidAntTemp

Right MidPostTemp

Effect size (%BOLD signal change)

(c) Right posterior regions
0.4
0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
Right Cereb

Left Cereb

(d) Cerebellar regions
Fig. 3. Effect size comparisons between GSS fROIs (darker bars) vs. group fROIs (lighter bars) for the sentences > nonwords contrast (black and grey bars), sentences > words
contrast (pink bars), and jabberwocky > nonwords contrast (blue bars).

195

E. Fedorenko et al. / Brain & Language 120 (2012) 187-207
Table 2
Results of the t-tests comparing the effect size values between GSS fROIs and group fROIs.
fROI

Sentences > nonwords

Sentences > words

Jabberwocky > nonwords

Left frontal regions

IFG
IFGorb
MFG
SFG

<.0005
<.05
<.005
<.005

<.001
n.s.
n.s.
<.05

<.0005
.055
n.s.
<.05

Left posterior regions

AntTemp
MidAntTemp
MidPostTemp
PostTemp
AngG

<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001
<.005

<.0005
<.0001
<.0001
<.0005
n.s.

<.01
<.0005
<.0005
n.s.
<.05

Right posterior regions

MidAntTemp
MidPostTemp
Right Cereb
Left Cereb

<.001
<.0005
<.005
<.01

<.0005
<.05
.090
<.05

<.05
<.05
.064
n.s.

Cerebellar regions

we investigate Brodmann Areas 44 and 45, defined using probabilistic cytoarchitectonic maps (Amunts et al., 1999). These two
Brodmann areas constitute Broca's region, which is one of the main
candidates for the seat of syntactic processing, as discussed in the
Introduction.
3.3.1. Methods
We first discuss the methodology of using probabilistic cytoarchitectonic maps more generally, since this tool is relatively new to
the field of neuroimaging of language. Then, we discuss the relationship between BAs 44 and 45 and our two GSS fROIs located
in the left IFG.
3.3.1.1. Probabilistic cytoarchitectonic maps. Although locations of
cytoarchitectonic areas (typically Brodmann areas) are commonly
estimated in neuroimaging studies based on the sulcal and gyral
anatomy, these estimates are imperfect because of high intersubject variability in the locations of different cytoarchitectonic
zones relative to macroanatomic landmarks (e.g., Amunts &
Willmes, 2006; Amunts et al., 1999; Zilles et al., 1997). Several
years ago, Zilles and colleagues (Amunts et al., 1999; Schormann
& Zilles, 1998; Zilles, Schleicher, Palomero-Gallagher, & Amunts,
2002) embarked on an ambitious project where the borders of cytoarchitectonic areas were delineated in ten post-mortem human
brains. These brains were first scanned at high resolution. Then,
each brain was thinly sliced and each target cytoarchitectonic zone
was delineated in the relevant set of slices in each brain. Finally,
the delineated sections in the relevant slices were aligned with
the MR volume of the brain. Normalizing these ten brains into a
common space then enabled the researchers to create probabilistic
cytoarchitectonic maps, i.e. representations of the percent of subjects who show a given Brodmann area in each voxel of the normalized (MNI) space. So far, thirteen Brodmann areas have been
delineated, and probabilistic maps for these areas are now publicly
available. Among the first were Brodmann areas 44 and 45
(Amunts et al., 1999).
These cytoarchitectonic maps are a powerful tool as they bring
us one step closer to being able to detect structure below the level
of sulci/gyri in fMRI. Some researchers (e.g., Grodzinsky, 2010; cf.
Fedorenko & Kanwisher, 2011) have argued that these maps are
an ideal way to answer questions of functional specialization in
the human brain, because (a) they represent cytoarchitecture
which has been long assumed (e.g., Brodmann, 1909) and, based
on the animal work, shown to correspond to function (e.g.,
Iwamura, Tanaka, Sakamoto, & Hikosaka, 1983; Matelli, Luppino,
& Rizzolatti, 1991; Rozzi, Ferrari, Bonini, Rizzolatti, & Fogassi,
2008), and (b) they contain information about the variability present across individual brains.

We agree that these maps provide an excellent tool for use in
fMRI, allowing a much more precise estimation of the location of
cytoarchitecture relative to macroanatomy. However, we also
think that some of the problems inherent in the traditional group
analyses affect these maps, as well. In particular, due to large variability in the locations of these areas across subjects, maps for
adjacent areas exhibit substantial overlap (for example, 43.0% of
BA44 voxels also belong to BA45, and 51.3% of BA45 voxels also belong to BA44). As a result, deciding which cytoarchitectonic area a
given voxel belongs to is non-trivial. It can be done using high
thresholding levels for the cytoarchitectonic maps, i.e., including
- for each BA - only voxels that are present in most of the 10
brains.7 However, this thresholding inevitably leads to a loss of
information about the variability in the underlying anatomy, which
is what these maps are trying to capture in the first place.
An alternative is to calculate for a target functional cluster of
interest the probability that any given voxel in that cluster would
be labeled as belonging to a particular cytoarchitectonic area (e.g.,
Santi & Grodzinsky, 2007). This is done by (a) extracting - for each
voxel in the functional cluster - the probability of that voxel being
in a given Brodmann area, and (b) averaging the values across all
the voxels in the cluster. This approach provides useful information
about the degree to which functional activations land within a particular Brodmann area. However, no standards have yet been set
for what probability values are sufficiently high in order to claim
that a functional cluster lands within the borders of a particular
Brodmann area. Setting an absolute stringent threshold seems
too arbitrary, so quantitative methods for this kind of an assessment need to be developed. These methods would presumably
take into account the size of the functional cluster, the variability
in the locations of individual Brodmann areas for the target area,
the extent of overlap between the target Brodmann area and adjacent Brodmann areas, the topography of the functional cluster relative to the topography of the target Brodmann area, etc. For
example, given the substantial overlap between areas BA44 and
BA45, it may be necessary to determine the minimum difference
in probability values between these two areas that would be convincing in claiming that a functional cluster corresponds to e.g.,
BA45 and not BA44. The degrees of freedom currently present in
this process make any claims about the relationship between functional activations and these probabilistic cytoarchitectonic areas

7
For reference, here is information on the overlap between BA 44 and BA45 across
different thresholds (the first number represents the percentage of BA44 voxels that
also belong to BA45, and the second number represents the percentage of BA45 voxels
that also belong to BA44; n is the threshold in terms of the minimal number of
subjects for whom a voxel corresponds to the relevant BA): n > 0: 43.0, 51.3; n > 1:
41.4, 46.4; n > 2: 27.6, 40.7; n > 3: 25.3, 25.4; n > 4: 20.5, 17.8; n > 5: 12.6, 6.9;
n > 6: 4.1, 1.7; n > 7: 0.4, 0.0; n > 8: 0.0, 0.0; n > 9: NA, 0.0.

196

E. Fedorenko et al. / Brain & Language 120 (2012) 187-207

Fig. 4. The relationship between Amunts et al. (1999) probabilistic cytoarchitectonic maps (shown in yellow) for BA 44 (left panel) and BA 45 (right panel) and our grouplevel partitions (shown with blue contours) for Left IFG (top) and Left IFGorb (bottom). Overlap is shown in red.

difficult to interpret (see Eickhoff et al., 2007, for a discussion of issues in assigning activations to cytoarchitectonic areas and a possible solution).
3.3.1.2. BA44 and BA45 vs. Left IFG and Left IFGorb fROIs. We here focus on two of our GSS fROIs: the ones that overlap with the two relevant Brodmann areas. Fig. 4 demonstrates the relationship
between the group-level partitions corresponding to our IFG regions (Left IFG and Left IFGorb) and BA44 and BA45. As can be seen
from the figure, our left IFG partition overlaps with both BA44 and
BA45 (which overlap with each other considerably, as discussed
above), and the left IFGorb partition overlaps with BA45, but almost not at all with BA44 (see Appendix E for more information
on the degrees of overlap).
In comparing the selectivity of the Brodmann areas to that of
our GSS fROIs, we used (a) all the voxels in each BA map, and (b)
only the voxels that are present in nine out of ten8 brains in Amunts
et al.'s analysis (i.e., only high-overlap voxels)9 in order to see
whether the results might look clearer at a higher threshold. In addition, we intersected the probabilistic maps with individual subjects'
activation maps (again, using all but the first functional run) and defined subject-specific ROIs in the same way as we did using grouplevel partitions in our GSS method. This was done in an attempt to
examine selectivity in a different kind of subject-specific fROIs. As discussed in Fedorenko et al. (2010), group-level functional partitions
are only one way to constrain the selection of subject-specific voxels.
Other possibilities are to constrain subject-specific ROIs with boundaries of macroanatomical structures with respect to each individual
subject's anatomy (the current standard in the fROI method in highlevel vision studies), boundaries of macroanatomical structures derived from probabilistic atlases (e.g., Rademacher et al., 2001;
Westbury, Zatorre, & Evans, 1999), or functional constraints derived
8
Because in BA44 there is no single voxel where all ten subjects overlap (in the
MNI space; see Fischl et al., 2008, for better alignment results in the spherical space),
we used the 9/10 threshold for both BAs.
9
Because the responses to the four conditions were similar across different
thresholds (see Appendix F), we only considered the two extreme thresholds here.

in some different way (e.g., by using the borders of a fROI reported in
another study). Using probabilistic cytoarchitectonic maps is yet another possibility (modulo the limitation that such maps only exist
for a subset of cytoarchitectonic areas so far).
In order to make the results comparable across these different
kinds of ROIs, even for the extraction of responses from the BA ROIs
(where no data were used for defining the ROIs), we used the data
from the first run only.

3.3.2. Results
The results for the three contrasts (sentences > nonwords, sentences > words, and jabberwocky > nonwords) are presented in
Fig. 5.
Across all three contrasts the effect sizes are much larger in
either of the two GSS fROIs (5b), compared to either way of defining the anatomical ROIs based on the probabilistic cytoarchitectonic maps (all voxels or just high-overlap voxels), 5a. In the
comparison between the Left IFG GSS fROI and (i) BA 44 all voxels,
(ii) BA 45 all voxels, (iii) BA 44 high-overlap voxels, and (iv) BA 45
high-overlap voxels, we see reliably larger effects for the sentences > nonwords contrast (p-values: <.0001, .0001, .001, .0001),
for the sentences > words contrast (p-values: <.0001, .0001, .05,
.001), and for the jabberwocky > nonwords contrast (p-values:
<.0001, .001, .01, .001). Similarly, in the comparison between the
Left IFGorb GSS fROI and (i) BA 44 all voxels, (ii) BA 45 all voxels,
(iii) BA 44 high-overlap voxels, and (iv) BA 45 high-overlap voxels,
we see reliably larger effects for the sentences > nonwords contrast
(p-values: <.0001, .0001, .01, .0001), for the sentences > words contrast (p-values: <.001, .001, .01, .01), and for the jabberwocky > nonwords contrast (p-values: <.001, .001, .01, .001).
In addition, setting the differences in selectivity aside, it is
worth noting that although some of the syntactic contrasts are significant in the BA ROIs (e.g., the difference between sentences and
nonwords is significant in each of the BAs in the analysis with all
the voxels (in both areas p < .02) and in BA45 in the analysis of
high-overlap voxels (p < .02)), these significance levels would not
survive any reasonable correction for multiple comparisons. (See

197

E. Fedorenko et al. / Brain & Language 120 (2012) 187-207

a. Standard group ROIs based on cytoarchitectonic
m ap s

Effect size (%BOLD signal change)

BA44 all
voxels

BA45 all
voxels

BA44 highoverlap
voxels

BA45 highoverlap
voxels

b . GSS f ROI s

Left IFG

Left IFGorb

c. Subject-specific fROIs
defined by intersecting
BA maps and individual
activation maps

BA44

BA45

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2

Sentences - Nonwords
Sentences - Words
Jabberwocky - Nonwords

0.1
0
-0.1

Fig. 5. Effect size comparison for BA44 and BA45 defined in two different ways using Amunts et al.'s (1999) probabilistic cytoarchitectonic maps (a); two GSS fROIs (Left IFG,
and Left IFGorb) (b); and subject-specific fROIs created by intersecting the BA maps with individual activation maps (c).

Appendix F for response magnitudes for the four conditions and a
further discussion of the response profiles of the BA ROIs.)
Is the higher power of the GSS fROIs compared to the BA ROIs
due to a difference between our group-level functional partitions
and the BA maps, or is it due to the importance of intersecting
any kind of spatial constraint (functional or anatomical) with individual subjects' activation maps? In Fig. 5c we show the results for
ROIs defined by intersecting individual subjects' activation maps
with the BA maps. The selectivity or these ROIs is comparable to
that observed for GSS fROIs (in fact, none of the differences in effect
sizes between the GSS fROIs and the subject-specific ROIs defined
using the BA maps are significant). This result suggests that it is not
the specific partitions that are important for selectivity but rather
the intersection of these partitions with each individual subject's
localizer activations.
4. Summary of Sections A-C
In Sections A-C, we compared the selectivity of our GSS fROIs to
different kinds of standard group ROIs where the same set of voxels in stereotaxic coordinates is used across subjects, and we have
shown that GSS fROIs indeed have higher selectivity than the ROIs
in each of the alternative methods considered. This strengthens our
claim that the individual-subjects functional localization approach
is optimally suited for investigating questions of functional specialization and holds promise for uncovering functional architecture in
the language system that may have been invisible to other methods. And to the extent that we discover - in future work - overlap
between e.g., syntactic processing and other aspects of language, or
between syntactic processing and some non-linguistic task, using
this more selective method, we will be more confident that what
we have discovered is true multi-functionality, rather than a false
positive resulting from averaging across adjacent but functionally
distinct regions.
5. Discussion
The goal of this paper was to test whether the individualsubjects functional localization method not only presents a viable
alternative to the traditional methods used in the neuroimaging
of language community, but whether it is superior to those
methods in its ability to differentiate among conditions in
language-sensitive brain regions. We directly compared the

individual-subjects functional localization approach and several
traditional approaches, focusing on regions implicated in syntactic
processing. The GSS fROIs exhibited higher selectivity than (a) ROIs
defined around the activation peaks from previous studies that
have claimed to identify syntax-sensitive regions, (b) fROIs defined
on the group analysis maps of the same data, and (c) anatomical
ROIs defined using probabilistic cytoarchitectonic maps.
As discussed in Section 1, important questions about the neural
architecture supporting syntactic processing currently remain
unanswered. These questions concern the nature and degree of
functional specialization of brain regions for syntactic processing
vs. (a) other aspects of linguistic processing, and (b) non-linguistic
cognitive tasks that may involve similar representations or computations. Answers to these questions are of interest in their own
right, and further provide a necessary foundation for the ultimate
goal of characterizing the computations conducted in these regions. Although we have not yet answered these questions, we
have here demonstrated that the standard stereotaxic-space-based
methods may not be ideally suited for investigating questions of
functional specificity. In particular, in order to uncover potential
functional dissociations, the most sensitive available method
should be used, such that the chances of revealing such dissociations would be maximized, while the chances of observing spurious overlap would be minimized. We have shown that the
traditional, group-based, methods underestimate selectivity, compared to the individual-subjects functional localization approach.
We therefore conclude that functional localization in individual
subjects holds promise for future investigations of syntactic processing, as well as for the domain of language more generally. In
particular, by investigating the responses of language-sensitive
regions - defined in individual subjects - to linguistic and nonlinguistic manipulations, we can arrive at a detailed characterization of each region and start generating hypotheses about the kinds
of representations each region stores or manipulates and the kinds
of computations it performs.
In addition to demonstrating higher selectivity of our GSS fROIs,
relative to several kinds of standard group ROIs, we wanted to
elaborate more generally on the informativeness/usefulness of
activation peaks reported in stereotaxic space given that we are
making an argument for the need to define regions under investigation functionally in individual subjects. Perhaps the most obvious way to assess the usefulness of activation peaks in
stereotaxic space would be to examine their replicability. This could
be done by selecting a small set of studies from the literature and

198

E. Fedorenko et al. / Brain & Language 120 (2012) 187-207

attempting to replicate their findings using the same exact experimental protocol and the same scanning and analysis procedures,
in order to examine the locations of activations across different
versions of the same study. Activation peaks in stereotaxic space
only have value to the extent that they represent some stable property of the surrounding neural tissue in that space. If this is the
case, then an exact replication of a study should result in activations landing in very similar stereotaxic locations. If differences
in the precise locations of activations across studies are sufficiently
large, this already poses a problem for the current methods. In particular, given that the extent of this kind of variability is unknown
in most cases10 (or at least is not quantified), it is unclear whether
activations reported, for example, for two different tasks and landing
in similar locations should be interpreted as activity of the same
functional region or distinct adjacent regions. Without formally
established criteria for such decisions, researchers are in danger of
being affected by their theoretical biases in interpreting such patterns of activation.
An alternative way to evaluate the informativeness of activation
peaks reported in stereotaxic space is to examine the responses of
ROIs defined around these peaks to some conditions in new datasets. Such analyses would assess the generalizability of the peaks.
The logic is as follows: if a particular location in stereotaxic space
(e.g., an activation peak) represents a region that supports some
cognitive function, then neural tissue surrounding this location
should respond to various new stimuli/tasks in ways consistent
with the hypothesized function. For example, it is reasonable to expect that a region argued to support auditory processing (based on
e.g., a contrast between listening to tones and looking at gratings)
would respond more strongly to music or speech sounds compared
to e.g., pictures of objects. Because we already had the data on the
response of the ROIs defined around the peaks meta-analyzed by
Vigneau et al. to the four conditions in our dataset (sentences,
words, jabberwocky and nonwords), we took a preliminary look
at this question. The results were disappointing. For example,
among the syntactic (n = 43) and sentence-level (n = 72) ROIs only
a little over half respond to sentences reliably stronger than to
nonwords/words at the most liberal threshold. This result is disturbing especially given that the contrast between sentences and
nonwords/words is quite large (cf. a contrast between more and
less complex sentences). If neural tissue around these peaks does
not show even the most rudimentary characteristics that would
be expected of regions that these peaks are argued to represent,
then how can we treat these peaks as meaningful and rely on them
in comparing results across studies, which is essential for accumulating knowledge about the functional profiles of languagesensitive cortex? In order to build on the results of previous
studies, we need some reason to believe that the same functional
regions are being characterized across studies. The GSS fROI
approach provides one way to do this.
Note that in advocating the use of fROIs defined in each subject
individually, for the study of the functional architecture of the language system, we are not arguing that other methods, or data
based on them, should be discarded. Rather we see the individual
fROI method as complementary in many ways to the standard
group analyses (see Fedorenko et al., 2010, for additional discussion). For one thing, the construction of the best localizers (still
very much work in progress) relies on some form of group analyses
to find the regions characterized by highest inter-subject overlap.
In addition, functional dissociations found with group analyses -

10
Because of the expense associated with fMRI, there are very few ``pure''
replications, which would be important for quantifying the variability in the precise
locations of activations for the same functional contrasts. (Critically, replication
attempts would help eliminate spurious findings from consideration and strengthen
our beliefs in a subset of findings that have a real empirical basis.)

as long as they are replicable - remain very powerful, as these phenomena are found despite the tendency to underestimate selectivity in group analyses.
Before concluding, it is important to point out some limitations
inherent in the individual-subjects functional localization approach and to discuss how these limitations can be addressed
(see also Fedorenko et al., 2010). There are two primary concerns
with interpreting the results obtained using the fROI method: (1)
coverage, and (2) response profile ambiguity. First, it is possible
that the localizer selected to identify brain regions of interest is
not inclusive enough and some key region(s) are left out. With respect to this issue, our localizer includes many of the regions previously implicated in linguistic processing. As a result, even though
it is possible that we are not including some important languagesensitive regions, a detailed characterization of the ones that we
do capture will significantly advance our understanding of how
language is implemented in the brain. (Besides, whole-brain analyses, which should always be used to supplement fROI-based analyses, will tell us if some systematic activations outside the borders
of the fROIs are missed. If such activations are observed, additional
new fROIs should be considered.)
And second, response profiles of functionally defined ROIs are
often ambiguous. For example, a response profile where an ROI
responds similarly strongly to two conditions is consistent with
both (a) true multi-functionality, and (b) functionally distinct
sub-regions within the ROI that respond to each of the conditions.
Similarly, a response profile where an ROI does not respond to
some condition could be observed when only a small proportion
of voxels in that ROI respond to that condition. These concerns
can be addressed by supplementing the fROI analyses with
whole-brain analyses. Whole-brain analyses may detect activations outside the borders of the fROIs as well as non-homogeneous
activations within the fROIs. Furthermore, in our recent work we
developed analysis tools that enable examining subsets of voxels
within individual subjects' fROIs that may have distinct functional
profiles (these analysis tools are currently available by request and
will soon be made available from http://web.mit.edu/evelina9/
www/funcloc.html). In cases where some functionally distinct subsets of voxels are discovered within a fROI, new fROI definitions
should be considered that would divide some of the fROIs into
smaller regions of analysis.
Coming back to the question of the neural basis of syntactic processing, although we remain agnostic as to whether any machinery
exists in the human brain that is specialized for processing structural aspects of the linguistic signal, we believe that traditional
methods - used in the vast majority of previous studies - have
faced important limitations in providing a clear answer to this
and related questions. In particular, group-based investigations
(a) underestimate selectivity by not taking into consideration variability in activation loci across subjects; (b) are rarely replicated
making it difficult to decide which findings are real and which
may be spurious; and (c) do not provide an easy way to compare
results across studies, thereby slowing down the process of knowledge accumulation about the functional profiles of key languagesensitive regions. The individual-subjects functional localization
approach circumvents these problems. In addition to its superior
ability to distinguish among conditions in a brain region's response, as demonstrated in the current paper (see also Saxe
et al., 2006), the subject-specific fROI approach (i) always includes
a partial replication of the results of previous studies (by showing
similar responses to the localizer conditions in a subset of the data
not used for ROI definition), and (ii) provides a reliable way to refer
to the same functional region across individuals and studies, leading to faster progress in discerning the function(s) of brain regions.
To conclude, maybe all language-sensitive regions indeed
support multiple aspects of language and/or some non-linguistic

E. Fedorenko et al. / Brain & Language 120 (2012) 187-207

199

Ellison Medical Foundation to NK and by award number
K99HD057522 from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute
of Child Health & Human Development to E.F. We also would
like to acknowledge Athinoula A. Martinos Imaging Center at
McGovern Institute for Brain Research, MIT.
Appendix A. The relationship between sample size and
selectivity
In the presence of inter-subject variability in the loci of activation, effect B might be present within a group-level ROI for a small
proportion of subjects (due to ``leakage'' from nearby regions
where effect B could be present). In these cases selectivity takes
the general form:
Fig. A1. Reduced selectivity with increasing number of subjects in the presence of
inter-subject variability in the loci of activation. In this example we computed the
selectivity (Eq. (2)) to detect an effect A (with dA = 1, and a = .05) against a second
effect B, when the effect B is not present (thick top line), as well as when the effect B
is present only in a small proportion of subjects (thin lines) due to ``leakage'' from
nearby areas in the presence of inter-subject variability in the loci of activation.

cognitive operations (e.g., Blumstein, 2009). If so, we will find
stronger evidence of such multi-functionality and will be able to
better characterize it by examining overlap effects at the individual-subject level. It is also possible, however, that stunning functional specificity has simply remained hidden in previous studies.
If so, the approach advocated here stands a good chance of finding
it.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank members of the Kanwisher and Gibson
labs for comments on the analyses reported here, and Sarah
Weigelt and five anonymous reviewers for comments on the
earlier drafts of the manuscript. We are also grateful to Mathieu
Vigneau and colleagues for providing us with the entire set of
activation peaks from Vigneau et al. (2006) with the relevant
descriptions. This research was supported by a grant from the

S 1/4 bA  1  bB 

 


1/4 T dA  n1=2  T 1 a  1  T dB  n1=2  T 1 a

2

where bB represents the sensitivity (power) to detect the effect B at
the same false positive level a, dA and dB are the signal-to-noise ratios of the effects A and B, respectively, within the ROI, and T represents the cumulative distribution function of the t-statistic. Eq. (2)
reduces to Eq. (1) (see Section 1.3) when effect B is not present
within the ROI voxels (when considering dB = 0, leading to bB = aB).
Even when effect B is present in a small proportion of subjects its
effect on selectivity can be quite marked (see Fig. A1), and it typically leads to decreasing levels of selectivity with increasing number of subjects (because the group-level analyses will now find a
population-level significant effect B at voxels where only a small
proportion of subjects truly show this effect).
Appendix B. Functional group-level partitions
See Fig. B1.
Appendix C
See Fig. C1.

Fig. B1. Functional group-level partitions that are used to constrain the selection of subject-specific voxels in the GSS fROI method.

200

E. Fedorenko et al. / Brain & Language 120 (2012) 187-207

Effect size comparisons between GSS fROIs and the ROIs defined around the syntactic
activation peaks from a number of previously published studies that fell within the
borders of the corresponding group-level partitions.
Left frontal partitions (top: IFG; middle: IFGorb;
bottom: MFG)

Left temporal partitions (top: AntTemp; middle:
MidPostTemp; bottom: PostTemp)

(a) Sentences > Nonwords (S-N)
Fig. C1. Effect size comparisons between GSS fROIs and the ROIs defined around the syntactic activation peaks from a number of previously published studies that fell within
the borders of the corresponding group-level partitions. The effect sizes for peak-defined ROIs are shown with arrows in the lower part of each plot. For each peak-defined ROI
we provide information on the study where the peak was reported, and, for completeness, the cluster to which the peak was assigned in Vigneau et al.'s (2006) clustering
analysis (e.g., F2p; see Vigneau et al., for details). For ease of visualization of the differences between average effect sizes for peak-defined ROIs and GSS fROIs for each
partition and for each contrast, smoothed probability density plots were generated using kernel density estimation (Parzen, 1962) with bandwidth .05% BOLD signal change
(the bandwidth parameter is comparable to the ``bin-width'' parameter in the more common histogram plots and controls the amount of smoothing). The effect sizes for the
GSS fROIs are shown with the arrow in the upper part of each plot.

Appendix D. An initial exploration of factors that plausibly
affect variability in selectivity among the different languagesensitive brain regions
We here consider two factors that plausibly affect the degree of
selectivity of our language-sensitive regions: (1) functional stability of a region, and (2) size of a region. With respect to both factors,

we focus on our main contrast: sentences > nonwords. Also,
although we are mostly interested in the variability in selectivity
among the GSS fROIs, we consider group-level fROIs (investigated
in Section 3.2) because some factors may differentially affect selectivity for these two kinds of fROIs. In this way, we expect to dissociate differences in selectivity among fROIs from differences in
selectivity among methods.

E. Fedorenko et al. / Brain & Language 120 (2012) 187-207

Left frontal partitions (top: IFG; middle: IFGorb;
bottom: MFG)

201

Left temporal partitions (top: AntTemp; middle:
MidPostTemp; bottom: PostTemp)

(b) Sentences > Words (S-W)
Fig. C1 (continued)

D.1. Functional stability
To estimate functional stability within a region, we computed
correlation values across all voxels in each functional partition between odd and even runs (for the sentences minus nonwords contrast) (Fedorenko et al., 2010). For each region, we averaged these
values across subjects. Functional stability in the patterns of differential response within a region can be expected to relate to the degree of selectivity within this region. In particular, if the selectivity
of a region is low, the patterns of differential response can be expected to be weaker and also show reduced functional stability
(either because of true differences in the loci of differential
responses, or because of higher relative contributions of noise
sources compared to these weaker differential effects).

Furthermore, regarding the selectivity of the different methods,
because the GSS method relies on the ability to consistently detect
subject-specific loci of activation we are interested in determining
whether the improvements in selectivity of the GSS method are
limited to those areas showing high functional stability or extend
to regions showing a wider range of functional stability values.
The associations between selectivity (indicated by S-N effect
sizes) and functional stability (indicated by within-subject S-N
spatial correlations) are shown in Fig. D1. Functional stability is a
good predictor of the degree of selectivity among the different regions, when considering both GSS fROIs (r = .85, T(10) = 5.11,
p < .001), as well as group-level fROIs (r = .75, T(10) = 3.61,
p = .005). This finding corroborates our expectation that the functional stability of an area is strongly associated with its selectivity.

202

E. Fedorenko et al. / Brain & Language 120 (2012) 187-207

Left frontal partitions (top: IFG; middle: IFGorb;
bottom: MFG)

Left temporal partitions (top: AntTemp; middle:
MidPostTemp; bottom: PostTemp)

(c) Jabberwocky > Nonwords (J-N)
Fig. C1 (continued)

When considering the selectivity of the different methods, the
improvements in selectivity when using GSS fROIs compared to
group-level ROIs, while modulated by functional stability (ANCOVA effect of functional stability, T(10) = 2.45, p = .034), extend to
the entire range of observed functional stability values (ANCOVA
main effect of method controlled at the level of the minimum observed functional stability value (.24), T(10) = 4.52, p = .001). This
finding is interesting because it indicates that, although the comparative improvements in selectivity of the GSS fROI method are
more marked for those areas showing high levels of functional stability, the improvements are manifested for a wide range of levels
of functional stability. In particular, if there is a minimal level of
functional stability necessary for the GSS fROI method to outperform the group-level fROI method, this minimal level is well below

the range of functional stability values observed in the current
study (minimal level below .09, p < .05).
D.2. Size
When considering a set of regions of different sizes around a
fixed anatomical location, Poldrack (2006) found an inverse association between ROI size and selectivity. To our knowledge, it is not
known whether this association extends to comparisons among
different areas. Investigations of possible associations between
selectivity and ROI size can guide the definition of appropriate
units of analyses that would offer maximal selectivity. Regarding
the selectivity of the different methods, because the GSS method
tends to produce on average smaller ROIs in our sample than the

203

E. Fedorenko et al. / Brain & Language 120 (2012) 187-207

Fig. D1. Functional stability (estimated using within-subject spatial correlations) as
a predictor of variability in the selectivity of the different language-sensitive
regions.

in group-level fROIs to 380 voxels in GSS fROIs), in agreement with
Poldrack (2006), this effect does not fully account for the observed
improvements in the GSS fROIs selectivity (only 6% of the variance
in selectivity values is explained by the reduction in ROI sizes). In
addition, improvements in selectivity were only weakly modulated
by baseline group-level ROI size (ANCOVA effect of ROI size,
T(10) = 1.34, p = .21), or by target GSS ROI size (ANCOVA effect of
ROI size, T(10) = 1.63, p = .13), and they extended to the entire
range of observed ROI size values (ANCOVA main effect of method
controlled at the level of the minimum observed ROI size value
(103 voxels), T(10) = 7.12, p < .001). These results indicate that
the GSS fROI method outperforms the group-level fROI method
for the entire range of observed ROI sizes. In addition they indicate
that the improvements in selectivity, when comparing the two
methods, are only weakly modulated by ROI size. This suggests
that the observed association between ROI size and selectivity for
the GSS fROIs does not result from a possible better performance of
this method for large ROIs (cf. we could expect better performance
for small ROIs due to the relatively larger effect of inter-subject
variability in the loci of activation in these cases), but rather could
be a true association for these regions that is revealed by the GSS
fROI method but not apparent when using group-level fROIs.
Given how important selectivity of different brain regions is for
understanding the neural architecture underlying human cognition, future work may be aimed at (a) investigating these factors
further with respect to language-sensitive regions by examining
other linguistic and non-linguistic contrasts, (b) investigating the
generalizabilty of these factors by examining their effects on selectivity of regions in other domains, and (c) exploring other factors
that may affect selectivity, such as location or spatial variability
across subjects.
Appendix E
E.1. Quantifying the overlap between BAs 44/45 and our IFG fROIs

Fig. D2. Size as a predictor of variability in the selectivity of the different languagesensitive regions.

group-level method we are interested in determining if the
improvements in selectivity of the GSS method are in some way related to the decrease in ROI size (when comparing the selectivity of
the same regions).
The associations between selectivity and ROI size are shown in
Fig. D2. When considering the selectivity of different regions, ROI
size was positively associated with selectivity for GSS fROIs
(r = .75, T(10) = 3.61, p = .005) but not for group-level fROIs
(r = .02, T(10) = 0.05, p = .96). This finding could indicate a true
association between ROI size and selectivity (across the language-sensitive regions) that is revealed by the GSS fROI method.
Alternatively, it could indicate a selectivity dependency of the
GSS fROI method that would result in selectivity improvements
only for large ROIs (although this possibility is not supported by
the additional between-method comparisons below). Further analyses and replications would be needed to better characterize the
nature of this association.
When considering the selectivity of the different methods, the
improvements in selectivity when using GSS fROIs compared to
group-level ROIs were only marginally associated with the corresponding decreases in ROI size (r = .25, T(10) = 0.83, p = 0.43).
The associations were weakly negative indicating that while the
improvements might be partially related to the associated decreases in ROI size (ROI size decreased on average from 670 voxels

In order to quantify the amount of overlap between the two
anatomical ROIs used in Section 3.3 (BA44, BA45), on the one hand,
and two of our fROIs located in/around the left IFG (Left IFG, Left
IFGorb), on the other hand, we computed the probability of each
of the two fROIs falling within the borders of either BA44 or
BA45, as described in Section 3.3. For completeness, we computed
these values for both (a) GSS fROIs, and (b) group-level fROIs (used
in Section 3.2). For GSS fROIs, the probability was computed for
each subject's fROI and then the values were averaged. The results
are presented in Table E1.
Appendix F
F.1. Response profiles of BA 44 and BA 45 with respect to the four
conditions
We here present the responses to the four conditions in our
dataset (sentences, words, jabberwocky and nonwords) in the

Table E1
Estimates of the probability that our functional ROIs (Left IFG and Left IFGorb) fall
within BA44 vs. BA45.
fROI

Left
Left
Left
Left

P of being within

IFG (GSS)
IFGorb (GSS)
IFG (group-level)
IFGorb (group-level)

BA44

BA45

.19 (.01)
.01 (.002)
.23
.02

.16 (.02)
.08 (.01)
.19
.12

204

E. Fedorenko et al. / Brain & Language 120 (2012) 187-207

0.7
0.6
0.5
Sentences
Words
Jabberwocky
Nonwords

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
BA44 all
voxels

BA44
threshold=5

BA44
threshold=9

BA45 all
voxels

BA45
threshold=5

BA45
threshold=9

Fig. F1. Responses of BAs 44 and 45 to the four conditions in our dataset, using different threshold levels to define the ROIs. Error bars represent standard errors of the mean,
computed across subjects.
Table G1
Effect sizes for the GSS fROIs.
fROI

Sentences > nonwords

Sentences > words

Jabberwocky > nonwords

Left frontal regions

IFG
IFGorb
MFG
SFG

1.43
1.81
1.21
1.05

0.75
0.81
0.40
0.76

1.30
1.22
1.49
0.69

Left posterior regions

AntTemp
MidAntTemp
MidPostTemp
PostTemp
AngG

1.50
1.91
1.92
2.16
1.29

1.20
1.28
1.20
1.32
0.55

1.00
1.23
1.45
0.60
0.69

Right posterior regions

MidAntTemp
MidPostTemp

1.38
1.69

1.41
0.77

0.63
1.19

Cerebellar regions

Right Cereb
Left Cereb

1.53
0.96

0.49
0.57

1.05
0.40

Table G2
Effect sizes for the peak-defined ROIs (syntactic peaks from Vigneau et al., 2006) [Results section 3.1].

ROIs for peaks within the IFG partition

IFGorb

MFG
AntTemp
MidPostTemp

PostTemp

fROI

Sentences > nonwords

Sentences > words

Jabberwocky > nonwords

Ben-Shachar et al. (2004) F3opd
Ben-Shachar et al. (2004) F3opd
Caplan (2001) F3opd
Caplan et al. (1999) F3opd
Constable et al. (2004) F3opd
Embick et al. (2000) F3opd
Luke et al. (2002) F3opd
Luke et al. (2002) F3opd
Luke et al. (2002) F3tv
Ben-Shachar et al. (2004) F3tv
Ben-Shachar et al. (2004) F3tv
Caplan (2001) F3tv
Cooke et al., 2002 F3tv
Waters et al. (2003) F3tv
Waters et al. (2003) F3tv
Waters et al. (2003) F3tv
Constable et al. (2004) F2p
Hashimoto and Sakai (2002) F2p
Luke et al. (2002) Pole
Gandour et al. (2003) STSp
Ben-Shachar et al. (2004) T2 ml
Embick et al. (2000) T2 ml
Gandour et al. (2003) T2 ml
Luke et al. (2002) T2 ml
Waters et al. (2003) T2 ml
Embick et al. (2000) STSp
Constable et al. (2004) T2p
Cooke et al. (2002) T2p
Luke et al. (2002) T2p

0.30
0.66
0.97
1.22
0.34
0.60
0.36
0.36
0.14
0.31
0.24
0.68
0.84
0.32
0.01
0.68
0.41
0.43
1.23
0.87
1.79
0.62
1.53
0.52
1.61
0.88
0.35
0.31
0.87

0.41
0.56
0.57
0.85
0.18
0.49
0.43
0.12
0.10
0.60
0.15
0.78
0.86
0.21
0.08
0.45
0.21
0.32
0.84
0.89
1.55
0.49
1.16
0.34
1.37
0.96
0.48
0.11
1.14

0.41
0.55
0.69
0.74
0.38
0.46
0.46
0.24
0.10
0.01
0.33
0.27
0.38
0.24
0.31
0.51
0.11
0.21
0.60
0.51
0.76
0.49
0.77
0.44
0.64
0.31
0.20
0.17
0.39

205

E. Fedorenko et al. / Brain & Language 120 (2012) 187-207
Table G3
Effect sizes for the group-level fROIs [Results section 3.2].
fROI

Sentences > nonwords

Sentences > words

Jabberwocky > nonwords

Left frontal regions

IFG
IFGorb
MFG
SFG

1.05
1.10
0.84
0.79

0.41
0.70
0.33
0.56

1.07
1.05
1.12
0.64

Left posterior regions

AntTemp
MidAntTemp
MidPostTemp
PostTemp
AngG

1.01
1.26
2.05
1.18
0.94

0.76
0.64
0.86
0.76
0.57

0.67
0.76
1.69
0.83
0.38

Right posterior regions

MidAntTemp
MidPostTemp

1.07
1.44

0.83
0.56

0.45
1.12

Cerebellar regions

Right Cereb
Left Cereb

1.36
0.59

0.44
0.37

1.23
0.44

Table G4
Effect sizes for the anatomical group-level ROIs and for individually defined fROIs using the probabilistic cytoarchitectonic maps to constrain the selection of voxels in individual
subjects [Results section 3.3].

Anatomically defined group-level ROIs

Subject-specific fROIs (BA maps are used to constrain the selection of
individual voxels)

fROI

Sentences > nonwords

Sentences > words

Jabberwocky > nonwords

BA 44 all voxels
BA 45 all voxels
BA 44 high-overlap
voxels
BA 45 high-overlap
voxels
BA 44
BA 45

0.51
0.55
0.53

0.13
0.22
0.30

0.81
0.84
0.56

0.35

0.30

0.32

1.44
1.59

0.73
0.80

1.25
1.17

two anatomical ROIs used in Section 3.3 (BA 44 and BA 45). We
performed the extraction using three different thresholds in the
probabilistic maps for each BA: (a) all the voxels in each map, (b)
only the voxels that are present in five out of ten brains, and (c)
only the voxels that are present in nine out of ten brains (highest-overlap voxels). If either or both of these areas support syntactic processing, then they should show a higher response to
sentences than to words, and a higher response to jabberwocky
than to nonwords. The results are presented in Fig. F1.
For the jabberwocky > nonwords contrast, consistent with these
regions' engagement in syntactic processing, we see significant effects in BA 45 at all three thresholds (p-values: <.001, <.005, and
<.01), and in BA44 at the two more liberal thresholds (p-values:
<.001, <.005, n.s.). However, for the sentences > words contrast
there are no significant effects at any threshold for either BA.11
Without a reliably higher response to sentences than to words, it
is difficult to interpret the effect observed for the jabberwocky > nonwords contrast. Even the reliable effects for the former
contrast are small, and overall, the conditions are not well
differentiated.
The lack of a reliable difference between the sentences and the
words conditions is surprising given that (1) this is a large contrast
(cf. contrasts between syntactically complex and syntactically simpler sentences used in the previous studies), (2) the sample size is
relatively large (n = 25), and (3) these regions are among the prime
candidates for syntactic processing. Based on these data, one
would be hard pressed to argue for the role of these regions in syntactic processing, leave alone some narrow aspect of syntax (e.g.,

11
It is worth noting that the fact that these BAs do not show dissociable functional
profiles with respect to this set of conditions does not mean that it is not possible to
obtain such a dissociation in principle. In fact, several published papers report
dissociations between activations observed in BAs 44 vs. 45 (e.g., Binkofski et al.,
2000; Horwitz et al., 2003; Heim et al., 2005; Santi & Grodzinsky, 2007; Heim et al.,
2009).

Grodzinsky & Santi, 2008). However, it is not the case that we think
that these regions play no role in syntactic processing. Rather these
results underscore, once again, the importance of using subjectspecific functional ROIs instead of standard group ROIs that are
the same across subjects. As reported in Section 3.3, both of the
GSS fROIs in the left IFG (as well as subject-specific fROIs defined
by intersecting the BA maps with individual activation maps)
strongly differentiate between the sentences and the words conditions. This suggests that the analyses reported here underestimate
selectivity (plausibly for the reasons discussed throughout the paper), and are therefore not optimal for addressing questions of the
functional architecture of the language system.

Appendix G
G.1. Standardized effect sizes for all the ROIs discussed in the paper
See Tables G1-G4.

References
Amunts, K., Schleicher, A., Burgel, U., Mohlberg, H., Uylings, H. B., & Zilles, K. (1999).
Broca's region revisited: Cytoarchitecture and intersubject variability. Journal of
Comparative Neurology, 412(2), 319-341.
Amunts, K., & Willmes, K. (2006). From inter-subject variability in clinical
syndromes to anatomical variability. Brain and Language, 96(2), 147-150
(discussion 157-170).
Badre, D., & D'Esposito, M. (2009). Is the rostro-caudal axis of the frontal lobe
hierarchical? Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 10, 659-669.
Badre, D., & Wagner, A. D. (2007). Left ventrolateral prefrontal cortex and the
cognitive control of memory. Neuropsychologia, 45(13), 2883-2901.
Bedny, M., Dodell-Feder, D., Pascual-Leone, A., Fedorenko, E., & Saxe, R. (in press).
Language processing in the occipital cortex of congenitally blind adults.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America.
Ben-Shachar, M., Hendler, T., Kahn, I., Ben-Bashat, D., & Grodzinsky, Y. (2003). The
neural reality of syntactic transformations: Evidence from functional magnetic
resonance imaging. Psychological Science, 14(5), 433-440.

206

E. Fedorenko et al. / Brain & Language 120 (2012) 187-207

Ben-Shachar, M., Palti, D., & Grodzinsky, Y. (2004). Neural correlates of syntactic
movement: Converging evidence from two fMRI experiments. Neuroimage,
21(4), 1320-1336.
Binkofski, F., Amunts, K., Stephan, K. M., Posse, S., Schormann, T., Freund, H. J., et al.
(2000). Broca's region subserves imagery of motion: A combined
cytoarchitectonic and fMRI study. Human Brain Mapping, 11(4), 273-285.
Blumstein, S. E. (2009). Reflections on the cognitive neuroscience of language. In The
cognitive neurosciences (IV ed.). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Blumstein, S. E., Myers, E. B., & Rissman, J. (2005). The perception of voice onset
time: An fMRI investigation of phonetic category structure. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 17(9), 1353-1366.
Bokde, A. L., Tagamets, M. A., Friedman, R. B., & Horwitz, B. (2001). Functional
interactions of the inferior frontal cortex during the processing of words and
word-like stimuli. Neuron, 30(2), 609-617.
Bookheimer, S. Y. (2002). Functional MRI of language: New approaches to
understanding the cortical organization of semantic processing. Annual
Review of Neurosciences, 25, 151-188.
Bornkessel-Schlesewsky, I., & Friederici, A. (2007). Neuroimaging studies of
sentence and discourse comprehension. In G. Gaskell (Ed.), The Oxford
handbook of psycholinguistics (pp. 407-424). United Kingdom: Oxford Univ
Press.
Brodmann, K. (1909). Vergleichende lokalisationslehre der grosshirnrinde in ihren
prinzipien dargestellt auf grund des zellenbaues. Barth Leipzig.
Buckner, R. L., Raichle, M. E., & Petersen, S. E. (1995). Dissociation of human
prefrontal cortical areas across different speech production tasks and gender
groups. Journal of Neurophysiology, 74(5), 2163-2173.
Burton, M. W. (2001). The role of inferior frontal cortex in phonological processing.
Cognitive Science, 25(5), 695-709.
Burton, M. W. (2009). Understanding the role of the prefrontal cortex in
phonological processing. Clinical Linguistics & Phonetics, 23(3), 180-195.
Caplan, D. (2007). Functional neuroimaging studies of syntactic processing in
sentence comprehension: A critical selective review. Language and Linguistics
Compass, 1(1-2), 32-47.
Carpentier, A., Pugh, K. R., Westerveld, M., Studholme, C., Skrinjiar, O., Thompson, J.
L., et al. (2001). Functional MRI of language processing: Dependence on input
modality and temporal lobe epilepsy. Epilepsia, 42(10), 1241-1254.
Carramazza, A., & Zurif, E. (1976). Dissociations of algorithmic and heuristic
processes in sentence comprehension: Evidence from aphasia. Brain and
Language, 3, 572-582.
Constable, R. T., Pugh, K. R., Berroya, E., Mencl, W. E., Westerveld, M., Ni, W., et al.
(2004). Sentence complexity and input modality effects in sentence
comprehension: An fMRI study. Neuroimage, 22(1), 11-21.
Cooke, A., Zurif, E. B., DeVita, C., Alsop, D., Koenig, P., Detre, J., et al. (2002). Neural
basis for sentence comprehension: Grammatical and short-term memory
components. Human Brain Mapping, 15(2), 80-94.
Costafreda, S. G., Fu, C. H., Lee, L., Everitt, B., Brammer, M. J., & David, A. S. (2006). A
systematic review and quantitative appraisal of fMRI studies of verbal fluency:
Role of the left inferior frontal gyrus. Human Brain Mapping, 27(10), 799-810.
Cutting, L. E., Clements, A. M., Courtney, S., Rimrodt, S. L., Schafer, J. G., Bisesi, J., et al.
(2006). Differential components of sentence comprehension: Beyond single
word reading and memory. Neuroimage, 29(2), 429-438.
Dapretto, M., & Bookheimer, S. Y. (1999). Form and content: Dissociating syntax and
semantics in sentence comprehension. Neuron, 24, 427-432.
Devlin, J. T., Matthews, P. M., & Rushworth, M. F. (2003). Semantic processing in the
left inferior prefrontal cortex: A combined functional magnetic resonance
imaging and transcranial magnetic stimulation study. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 15(1), 71-84.
Duncan, J. (2001). An adaptive coding model of neural function in prefrontal cortex.
Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 2(11), 820-829.
Duncan, J. (2010). The multiple-demand (MD) system of the primate brain: Mental
programs for intelligent behaviour. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 14(4), 172-179.
Eickhoff, S. B., Paus, T., Caspers, S., Grosbras, M.-H., Evans, A., Zilles, K., et al. (2007).
Assignment of functional activations to probabilistic cytoarchitectonic areas
revisited. Neuroimage, 36, 511-521.
Fadiga, L., Craighero, L., & D'Ausilio, A. (2009). Broca's area in language, action, and
music. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1169, 448-458.
Fedorenko, E., & Kanwisher, N. (2011). Functionally localizing language-sensitive
regions in individual subjects with fMRI: A reply to Grodzinsky's critique of
Fedorenko & Kanwisher (2009). Language and Linguistics Compass, 5(2), 78-94.
Fedorenko, E., Hsieh, P.-J., Nieto-Castanon, A., Whitfield-Gabrieli, S., & Kanwisher, N.
(2010). A new method for fMRI investigations of language: Defining ROIs
functionally in individual subjects. Journal of Neurophysiology, 104, 1177-1194.
Fedorenko, E., & Kanwisher, N. (2009). Neuroimaging of language: Why hasn't a
clearer picture emerged? Language and Linguistics Compass, 3(4), 839-865.
Fiez, J. A. (1997). Phonology, semantics, and the role of the left inferior prefrontal
cortex. Human Brain Mapping, 5(2), 79-83.
Fischl, B., Rajendran, N., Busa, E., Augustinack, J., Hilds, O., Thomas Yeo, B. T., et al.
(2008). Cortical folding patterns and predicting cytoarchitecture. Cerebral
Cortex, 18(8), 1973-1980.
Ford, M. (1983). A method for obtaining measures of local parsing complexity
throughout sentences. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 22,
203-218.
Friederici, A. D., Fiebach, C. J., Schlesewsky, M., Bornkessel, I. D., & von Cramon, D. Y.
(2006). Processing linguistic complexity and grammaticality in the left frontal
cortex. Cerebral Cortex, 16(12), 1709-1717.

Friederici, A. D., & Kotz, S. A. (2003). The brain basis of syntactic processes:
Functional imaging and lesion studies. Neuroimage, 20, 8-17.
Friederici, A. D., Meyer, M., & von Cramon, D. Y. (2000b). Auditory language
comprehension: An event-related fMRI study on the processing of syntactic and
lexical information. Brain and Language, 75(3), 289-300.
Friederici, A. D., Ruschenmeyer, S.-A., Hahne, A., & Fiebach, C. J. (2003). The role of
left inferior frontal and superior temporal cortex in sentence comprehension:
Localizing syntactic and semantic processes. Cerebral Cortex, 13, 170-177.
Friederici, A. D., Wang, Y., Herrmann, C. S., Maess, B., & Oertel, U. (2000a).
Localization of early syntactic processes in frontal and temporal cortical areas:
A magnetoencephalographic study. Human Brain Mapping, 11, 1-11.
Gentner, T. Q., Fenn, K. M., Margoliash, D., & Nusbaum, H. C. (2006). Recursive
syntactic pattern learning by songbirds. Nature, 440(7088), 1204-1207.
Gibson, E. (1998). Linguistic complexity: Locality of syntactic dependencies.
Cognition, 68, 1-76.
Gordon, P., Hendrick, R., & Johnson, M. (2001). Memory interference during
language processing. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory &
Cognition, 27(6), 1411-1423.
Gough, P. M., Nobre, A. C., & Devlin, J. T. (2005). Dissociating linguistic processes in
the left inferior frontal cortex with transcranial magnetic stimulation. Journal of
Neuroscience, 25(35), 8010-8016.
Graves, W. W., Grabowski, T. J., Mehta, S., & Gupta, P. (2008). The left posterior
superior temporal gyrus participates specifically in accessing lexical phonology.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 20(9), 1698-1710.
Grewe, T., Bornkessel, I., Zysset, S., Wiese, R., von Cramon, D. Y., & Schlesewsky, M.
(2005). The emergence of the unmarked: A new perspective on the languagespecific function of Broca's area. Human Brain Mapping, 26(3), 178-190.
Grodzinsky, Y. (2010). The picture of the linguistic brain: How sharp can it be?
Reply to Fedorenko & Kanwisher. Language and Linguistics Compass, 4(8),
605-622.
Grodzinsky, Y., & Friederici, A. D. (2006). Neuroimaging of syntax and syntactic
processing. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 16(2), 240-246.
Grodzinsky, Y., & Santi, A. (2008). The battle for Broca's region. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 12(12), 474-480.
Hagoort, P., Baggio, G., & Willems, R. M. (2009). Semantic unification. In The new
cognitive neurosciences (IV ed.). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hagoort, P., Hald, L., Bastiaansen, M., & Petersson, K. M. (2004). Integration of word
meaning and world knowledge in language comprehension. Science, 304(5669),
438-441.
Hagoort, P., Indefrey, P., Brown, C., Herzog, H., Steinmetz, H., & Seitz, R. J. (1999). The
neural circuitry involved in the reading of German words and pseudowords: A
PET study. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 11(4), 383-398.
Hasson, U., Nusbaum, H. C., & Small, S. L. (2006). Repetition suppression for spoken
sentences and the effect of task demands. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,
18(12), 2013-2029.
Heim, S., Alter, K., Ischebeck, A. K., Amunts, K., Eickhoff, S. B., Mohlberg, H., et al.
(2005). The role of the left Brodmann's areas 44 and 45 in reading words and
pseudowords. Cognitive Brain Research, 25(3), 982-993.
Heim, S., Eickhoff, S. B., & Amunts, K. (2009). Different roles of cytoarchitectonic BA
44 and BA 45 in phonological and semantic verbal fluency as revealed by
dynamic causal modelling. Neuroimage, 48(3), 616-624.
Hein, G., & Knight, R. T. (2008). Superior temporal sulcus - it's my area: Or is it?
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 20(12), 2125-2136.
Hickok, G., Okada, K., & Serences, J. (2009). Area Spt in the human planum
temporale supports sensory-motor interaction for speech processing. Journal of
Neurophysiology, 101, 2725-2732.
Holmes, V. M., & O'Regan, J. K. (1981). Eye fixation patterns during the reading of
relative-clause sentences. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 20(4),
417-430.
Horwitz, B., Amunts, K., Bhattacharyya, R., Patkin, D., Jeffries, K., Zilles, K., et al.
(2003). Activation of Broca's area during the production of spoken and signed
language: A combined cytoarchitectonic mapping and PET analysis.
Neuropsychologia, 41(14), 1868-1876.
Humphries, C., Binder, J. R., Medler, D. A., & Liebenthal, E. (2006). Syntactic and
semantic modulation of neural activity during auditory sentence
comprehension. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 18(4), 665-679.
Humphries, C., Binder, J. R., Medler, D. A., & Liebenthal, E. (2007). Time course of
semantic processes during sentence comprehension: An fMRI study.
Neuroimage, 36(3), 924-932.
Humphries, C., Love, T., Swinney, D., & Hickok, G. (2005). Response of anterior
temporal cortex to syntactic and prosodic manipulations during sentence
processing. Human Brain Mapping, 26, 128-138.
Humphries, C., Willard, K., Buchsbaum, B., & Hickok, G. (2001). Role of anterior
temporal cortex in auditory sentence comprehension: An fMRI study.
NeuroReport, 12(8), 1749-1752.
Indefrey, P., Brown, C. M., Hellwig, F., Amunts, K., Herzog, H., Seitz, R. J., et al. (2001).
A neural correlate of syntactic encoding during speech production. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 98(10),
5933-5936.
Indefrey, P., & Levelt, W. J. M. (2004). The spatial and temporal signatures of word
production components. Cognition, 92(1/2), 101-104.
Iwamura, Y., Tanaka, M., Sakamoto, M., & Hikosaka, O. (1983). Converging patterns
of finger representation and complex response properties of neurons in area 1
of the first somatosensory cortex of the conscious monkey. Experimental Brain
Research, 51(3), 327-337.

E. Fedorenko et al. / Brain & Language 120 (2012) 187-207
January, D., Trueswell, J. C., & Thompson-Schill, S. L. (2009). Co-Localization of
stroop and syntactic ambiguity resolution in Broca's area: Implications for the
neural basis of sentence processing. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 21(12),
2434-2444.
Kaan, E., & Swaab, T. Y. (2002). The neural circuitry of syntactic comprehension.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 6(8), 350-356.
Kaminski, J., Call, J., & Fischer, J. (2004). Word learning in a domestic dog: Evidence
for ``fast mapping''. Science, 304(5677), 1682-1683.
Kanwisher, N. (2010). Functional specificity in the human brain: A window into the
functional architecture of the mind. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America, 107(25), 11163-11170.
Kanwisher, N., McDermott, J., & Chun, M. M. (1997). The fusiform face area: A
module in human extrastriate cortex specialized for face perception. Journal of
Neuroscience, 17(11), 4302-4311.
King, J., & Just, M. (1991). Individual differences in syntactic processing: The role of
working memory. Journal of Memory and Language, 30, 580-602.
Kriegeskorte, N., Simmons, W. K., Bellgowan, P. S., & Baker, C. I. (2009). Circular
analysis in systems neuroscience: The dangers of double dipping. Nature
Neuroscience, 12(5), 535-540.
Lindenberg, R., Fangerau, H., & Seitz, R. J. (2007). ``Broca's area'' as a collective term?
Brain and Language, 102(1), 22-29.
Matelli, M., Luppino, G., & Rizzolatti, G. (1991). Architecture of superior and mesial
area 6 and the adjacent cingulate cortex in the macaque monkey. Journal of
Comparative Neurology, 311(4), 445-462.
Mazoyer, B. M., Tzourio, N., Frak, V., Syrota, A., Murayama, N., Levrier, O., et al.
(1993). The cortical representation of speech. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,
5, 467-479.
Meyer, M., Friederici, A. D., & von Cramon, D. Y. (2000). Neurocognition of auditory
sentence comprehension: Event related fMRI reveals sensitivity to syntactic
violations and task demands. Cognitive Brain Research, 9, 19-33.
Michael, E. B., Keller, T. A., Carpenter, P. A., & Just, M. A. (2001). Fmri investigation of
sentence comprehension by eye and by ear: Modality fingerprints on cognitive
processes. Human Brain Mapping, 13(4), 239-252.
Miller, E. K., & Cohen, J. D. (2001). An integrative theory of prefrontal cortex
function. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 24, 167-202.
Myers, E. B., Blumstein, S. E., Walsh, E., & Eliassen, J. (2009). Inferior frontal regions
underlie the perception of phonetic category invariance. Psychological Science,
20(7), 895-903.
Neville, H. J., Bavelier, D., Corina, D., Rauschecker, J., Karni, A., Lalwani, A., et al.
(1998). Cerebral organization for language in deaf and hearing subjects:
Biological constraints and effects of experience. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 95(3), 922-929.
Noppeney, U., Phillips, J., & Price, C. (2004). The neural areas that control the
retrieval and selection of semantics. Neuropsychologia, 42, 1269-1280.
Noppeney, U., & Price, C. J. (2004). An fMRI study of syntactic adaptation. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 16(4), 702-713.
Novick, J. M., Trueswell, J. C., & Thompson-Schill, S. L. (2005). Cognitive control and
parsing: Reexamining the role of Broca's area in sentence comprehension.
Cognition Affect Behavioral Neuroscience, 5(3), 263-281.
Olson, I. R., Plotzker, A., & Ezzyat, Y. (2007). The enigmatic temporal pole: A review
of findings on social and emotional processing. Brain, 130(Pt 7), 1718-1731.
Osterhout, L., Allen, M., McLaughlin, J., & Inoue, K. (2002). Brain potentials elicited
by prose-embedded linguistic anomalies. Memory and Cognition, 30(8),
1304-1312.
Osterhout, L., & Holcomb, P. J. (1993). Event-related potentials and syntactic
anomaly: Evidence of anomaly detection during the perception of continuous
speech. Language and Cognitive Processes, 8, 413-438.
Ouattara, K., Lemasson, A., & Zuberbuhler, K. (2009). Campbell's monkeys use
affixation to alter call meaning. Plos One, 4(11), e7808.
Parzen, E. (1962). On estimation of a probability density function and mode. The
Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 33(3), 1065-1076.
Patterson, K., Nestor, P. J., & Rogers, T. T. (2007). Where do you know what you
know? The representation of semantic knowledge in the human brain. Nature
Reviews Neuroscience, 8(12), 976-987.
Pepperberg, I. (2000). The Alex studies: Cognitive and communicative abilities of grey
parrots. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Petersen, S. E., Fox, P. T., Snyder, A. Z., & Raichle, M. E. (1990). Activation of
extrastriate and frontal cortical areas by visual words and word-like stimuli.
Science, 249(4972), 1041-1044.
Plante, E., Creusere, M., & Sabin, C. (2002). Dissociating sentential prosody from
sentence processing: Activation interacts with task demands. Neuroimage, 17,
401-410.
Poldrack, R. A. (2006). Can cognitive processes be inferred from neuroimaging data?
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 10(2), 59-63.

207

Poldrack, R. A., Wagner, A. D., Prull, M. W., Desmond, J. E., Glover, G. H., & Gabrieli, J.
D. (1999). Functional specialization for semantic and phonological processing in
the left inferior prefrontal cortex. Neuroimage, 10(1), 15-35.
Rademacher, J., Morosan, P., Schormann, T., Schleicher, A., Werner, C., Freund, H. J.,
et al. (2001). Probabilistic mapping and volume measurement of human
primary auditory cortex. Neuroimage, 13, 669-683.
Rodd, J. M., Davis, M. H., & Johnsrude, I. S. (2005). The neural mechanisms of speech
comprehension: fMRI studies of semantic ambiguity. Cerebral Cortex, 15(8),
1261-1269.
Rogalsky, C., & Hickok, G. (2009). Selective attention to semantic and syntactic
features modulates sentence processing networks in anterior temporal cortex.
Cerebral Cortex, 19, 786-796.
Rozzi, S., Ferrari, P. F., Bonini, L., Rizzolatti, G., & Fogassi, L. (2008). Functional
organization of inferior parietal lobule convexity in the macaque monkey:
Electrophysiological characterization of motor, sensory and mirror responses
and their correlation with cytoarchitectonic areas. European Journal of
Neuroscience, 28(8), 1569-1588.
Santi, A., & Grodzinsky, Y. (2007). Working memory and syntax interact in Broca's
area. Neuroimage, 37(1), 8-17.
Savage-Rumbaugh, E. S., Murphy, J., Sevcik, R. A., Brakke, K. E., Williams, S. L.,
Rumbaugh, D. M., et al. (1993). Language comprehension in ape and child.
Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development, 101, 252.
Saxe, R., Brett, M., & Kanwisher, N. (2006). Divide and conquer: A defense of
functional localizers. Neuroimage, 30(4), 1088-1096 (discussion 1097-1099)_.
Saxe, R., & Kanwisher, N. (2003). People thinking about thinking people. The role of
the temporo-parietal junction in ``theory of mind''. Neuroimage, 19(4),
1835-1842.
Schlesewsky, M., & Bornkessel, I. (2004). On incremental interpretation: Degrees of
meaning accessed during sentence comprehension. Lingua, 114(9-10),
1213-1234.
Schnur, T. T., Schwartz, M. F., Kimberg, D. Y., Hirshorn, E., Coslett, H. B., & ThompsonSchill, S. L. (2009). Localizing interference during naming: Convergent
neuroimaging and neuropsychological evidence for the function of Broca's
area. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America, 106(1), 322-327.
Schormann, T., & Zilles, K. (1998). Three-dimensional linear and nonlinear
transformations: An integration of light microscopical and MRI data. Human
Brain Mapping, 6(5-6), 339-347.
Snyder, H. R., Feigenson, K., & Thompson-Schill, S. L. (2007). Prefrontal cortical
response to conflict during semantic and phonological tasks. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 19(5), 761-775.
Stromswold, K., Caplan, D., Alpert, N., & Rauch, S. (1996). Localization of syntactic
comprehension by positron emission tomography. Brain and Language, 52,
452-473.
Thompson-Schill, S. L. (2005). Dissecting the language organ: A new look at the role
of Broca's area in language processing. Twenty-First Century Psycholinguistics:
Four Cornerstones, 173-189.
Tootell, R. B. H., Reppas, J. B., Dale, A. M., Look, R. B., Sereno, M. I., Brady, T. J., et al.
(1995). Functional MRI evidence for a visual motion after effect in human
cortical area MT/V5. Nature, 375, 139-141.
Vandenberghe, R., Nobre, A. C., & Price, C. J. (2002). The response of left temporal
cortex to sentences. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 14(4), 550-560.
Vigneau, M., Beaucousin, V., Herve, P. Y., Duffau, H., Crivello, F., Houde, O., et al.
(2006). Meta-analyzing left hemisphere language areas: Phonology, semantics,
and sentence processing. Neuroimage, 30(4), 1414-1432.
Vul, E., & Kanwisher, N. (2009). Begging the question: The non-independence error
in fMRI data analysis. In S. Hanson & M. Bunzl (Eds.), Foundations and Philosophy
for Neuroimaging (pp.71-91).
Westbury, C., Zatorre, R. J., & Evans, A. C. (1999). Quantifying variability in the
planum temporale: A probability map. Cerebral Cortex, 9, 392-405.
Willems, R. M., & Hagoort, P. (2009). Broca's region: Battles are not won by ignoring
half of the facts. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 13(3), 101 (author reply 102).
Wright, P., Randall, B., Marslen-Wilson, W. D., & Tyler, L. (2010). Dissociating
linguistic and task-related activity in the left inferior frontal gyrus. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 23(2), 404-413.
Zilles, K., Schleicher, A., Langemann, C., Amunts, K., Morosan, P., PalomeroGallagher, N., et al. (1997). Quantitative analysis of sulci in the human
cerebral cortex: Development, regional heterogeneity, gender difference,
asymmetry, intersubject variability and cortical architecture. Human Brain
Mapping, 5(4), 218-221.
Zilles, K., Schleicher, A., Palomero-Gallagher, N., & Amunts, K. (2002). Quantitative
analysis of cyto- and receptor architecture of the human brain. Brain Mapping:
The Methods, 2.

