C Cambridge University Press 2012 doi:10.1017/S1366728911000691
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition 15 (4), 2012, 736-756 

Specific and generic subjects in
the Italian of German-Italian
simultaneous bilinguals and L2
learners

TA N J A K U P I S C H
University of Hamburg & Lund University

(Received: March 24, 2011; final revision received: November 19, 2011; accepted: November 22, 2011; first published online 6 March 2012)

This study investigates definite articles in specific and generic subject nominals in Italian spoken by adult simultaneous
bilinguals (2L1ers) and second language learners (L2ers). The study focuses on plural and mass DPs, in which German and
Italian differ. The aims are to (i) compare acquisition outcomes between the weaker and the stronger language in 2L1
acquisition, (ii) see in a comparison with L2ers whether the phenomenon under investigation, which is typically acquired late
(after age 6;0), lacks age of onset effects, and (iii) discuss predictions for the directionality of cross-linguistic influence.
Twenty German-Italian 2L1ers and 15 advanced L2ers of Italian with German as their native language were tested in an
acceptability judgment task and a truth value judgment task. The results show clear differences between Italian as the weaker
and as the stronger language in 2L1 acquisition, and similarities between Italian as L2 and as the weaker language in 2L1
acquisition.
Keywords: simultaneous bilingualism, weaker and stronger language, L2 acquisition, specific and generic DPs

1. Introduction
This study investigates the use and interpretation of
specific and generic subject noun phrases in the Italian
of 20 adult German-Italian simultaneous bilinguals
(2L1ers) and 15 second language learners (L2ers) with
Italian as a second language and German as their first
language.
Italian and German both have articles, but these
languages differ in terms of the contexts where articles
must be used. Both languages require articles with specific
reference (nominals corresponding to the cats in The cats
sleep a lot). However, only Italian requires articles with
generic reference (nominals corresponding to cats in Cats
sleep a lot). In contrast, German allows bare nouns in
this case, similar to English. In brief, the two languages
display overlap in terms of article use, but this overlap is
only partial.
Another property of the phenomenon investigated
here is that it is at the crossroads between syntax,
semantics and pragmatics or discourse, because the
interpretation of the article depends on the context
* Data for this study were collected as part of the Project E11 at
the Research Centre of Multilingualism in Hamburg. I gratefully
acknowledge funding from the German Science Foundation. I wish
to thank Dagmar Barton, Giulia Bianchi, Ilse Stangen as well as three
anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments on earlier versions
of this paper. Special thanks to Joost van de Weijer for his assistance
with the statistics.

in which the noun phrase is used. This is relevant
because studies on cross-linguistic influence (CLI) - in
bilingual acquisition, incomplete acquisition and attrition
in adult bilinguals - suggest that the linguistic competence
of bilinguals is not affected globally. Rather, when
compared to narrow-syntax, interfaces (i.e., areas where
syntax meets other linguistic modules) turn out to be
comparatively more vulnerable (see Sorace, 2011, for an
overview).
Studies within the field of bilingual first language
acquisition (e.g., Hulk & Muller, 2000) have argued that
PARTIAL OVERLAP OF PROPERTIES and A LOCATION AT
THE INTERFACE BETWEEN SYNTAX AND PRAGMATICS or
DISCOURSE are prerequisites for the occurrence of CLI.
And, in fact, bilingual English-Italian and German-Italian
children, even at school ages, have been shown to have
problems using and interpreting articles appropriately
(Kupisch & Pierantozzi, 2010; Serratrice, Sorace, Filiaci
& Baldo, 2009, age range: 6-10 years). Importantly,
however, monolingual children in some languages show
the same problems, yet to a different degree or for
a shorter period of time than bilinguals (Kupisch &
Pierantozzi, 2010). One might therefore speculate whether
bilingual children acquire the investigated phenomenon
incompletely, or differently (compared to monolinguals)
because of CLI from the language that is being acquired
simultaneously. This may be so especially for a minority
language, because once bilingual children enter school,
they normally tend to hear and use the minority language

Address for correspondence:
University of Hamburg, Institut fur Romanistik, Von-Melle-Park 6, 20149 Hamburg, Germany
tanja.kupisch@uni-hamburg.de

Generic subjects in Italian bilinguals
even less than before - bilingual schooling being the
exception.
Montrul and Ionin (2010) have provided evidence
that adult Spanish heritage speakers face problems using
articles with generic subject noun phrases. The authors
argued in favour of incomplete acquisition. However, their
study did not investigate Spanish-English bilinguals in a
Spanish-speaking environment. It therefore remains an
open question whether such problems with article use are
typical of English-Spanish bilinguals, or whether they are
typical only for those with Spanish as a (weaker) minority
language.
The present study addresses the following related
research questions:
* Do acquisition outcomes depend on whether Italian
is acquired as a bilingual speaker's weaker or stronger
language?
* Is age of onset a factor with respect to the acquisition
of article use in specific and generic noun phrases?
The study investigates specific and generic subject
noun phrases, comparing two groups of bilinguals who
differ in terms of their stronger language, and L2 learners
of Italian with German as their L1. Moreover, quantitative
and qualitative models on the directionality of CLI with
respect to the phenomenon are discussed.
In the following, the concepts of weaker and stronger
language, language dominance as well as contemporary
ideas on interfaces as vulnerable domains are introduced.
Sections 2 and 3 introduce the investigated phenomenon
and formulate predictions on CLI. Section 4 summarizes
previous research. Section 5 presents two experimental
studies, Section 6 discusses the results and Section 7 draws
conclusions.
1.1 The weaker and the stronger language in
simultaneous bilingualism
Throughout, the terms STRONGER and WEAKER
LANGUAGE characterize the learner's relative proficiency
in the two languages. Over the past years, it has been
frequently argued that the grammar of adult bilinguals
differs from that of monolingual speakers. A closer look
reveals that much of this research has been dedicated
to bilingual speakers' weaker language, which in many
studies coincides with the HERITAGE LANGUAGE (e.g.,
Montrul, 2008; Polinsky, 1997). The latter is loosely
defined as a language spoken at home without being the
language of a larger society (or nation) (Rothman, 2009).
Nevertheless, the view that the heritage language is always
the weaker language may not be correct for all speakers.
Similarly, it is debatable whether the notions of STRONGER
and DOMINANT LANGUAGE are interchangeable. Some
authors reserve the term "dominant" for "the predominant

737

of the ambient languages in a given setting" (Meisel, 2007,
p. 499), pointing out that it need not correspond to the
more proficient language of a speaker.
For the bilingual participants investigated in this
study, the dominant and strong language happen to
coincide, as do the minority (i.e., heritage) and weaker
language. Perhaps unsurprisingly, Italian developed into
the more proficient language of the bilingual German-
Italian speakers who grew up in Italy, and into the less
proficient language of those who grew up in Germany.
Therefore, the terms STRONGER and DOMINANT language
are here used interchangeably.
It is often taken for granted, and rarely investigated
systematically, that convergence to some monolingual
norm is guaranteed provided some language constitutes
the stronger language, while the same may but need not
be the case for the weaker language. This study shows
that, for the phenomenon investigated, this assumption is
indeed correct.
1.2 Age of onset vs. frequency of exposure
There is a consensus that the simultaneous acquisition of
two languages can be seen as an instance of bilingual first
language acquisition (2L1 acquisition). Normally, three
reasons are offered in support of this view: (i) bilinguals
separate their languages from early on, (ii) they pass
through the same developmental stages as monolinguals
(sometimes more slowly or faster), and (iii) they commit
the same types of error as monolinguals (see Meisel, 2011,
for an overview).
Within the generative framework, it is an uncontroversial assumption that the process of first language
acquisition (monolingual and bilingual) is guided by
UG, the acquisition outcome being successful provided
that both languages are heard and used sufficiently.1
In contrast, many researchers hold that the same does
not apply for second language acquisition in adulthood
(L2 acquisition), irrespective of frequency (i.e., how
much the L2 is heard and used). According to BleyVroman's (1990) Fundamental Difference Hypothesis -
which is consistent with Lenneberg's (1967) Critical
Period Hypothesis - the innate linguistic system that
operates in childhood is no longer available to adult L2ers,
who must therefore rely on domain-general cognitive
mechanisms.
Lenneberg associated the critical period with the age
around puberty. Recent work by Meisel (2011) argues
for at least two clusters of sensitive phases in language
acquisition. One cluster is around age 4;0, the other
1

Admittedly, this statement is rather vague. To my knowledge, no
study has so far determined how much language input and use, and
during which developmental period, is necessary to acquire a language
successfully.

738

Tanja Kupisch

around age 7;0. Here, the conditions that are optimal for
language acquisition slowly start to fade out. According to
Meisel, inflectional morphology is subject to this change
relatively early (around age 4), but the two clusters
of sensitive phases are not necessarily grammatically
homogeneous. Hence, sensitive periods for particular
syntactic phenomena may be associated with any of the
two phases. The assumption that some critical phases
come to end only around the age of school entry, together
with the finding that some phenomena (e.g., how to
express generic reference) are not fully acquired by
that same age, supports the hypothesis that, in relevant
domains, differences between L1 and L2 learners may
be neutralized. In other words, with respect to some
phenomena, "L1 learners may be L2 learners". It might be
a matter of frequency of language exposure and use (rather
than age of first exposure) as to how successfully these
phenomena will be acquired. The acquisition of generics
could be a case in point.2
2. Article use in Italian and German
Article use is a particularly fruitful phenomenon in
investigating CLI. Following the original proposals by
Hulk and Muller (2000) and Platzack (2001), phenomena
that are dependent on pragmatic and contextual variables
are especially vulnerable in acquisition. As will become
clearer below, contextual information is crucial for the
appropriate use and interpretation of articles.3
German (Ge.) and Italian (It.) have definite and
indefinite articles, as well as contexts in which nouns
can or must occur without an article.4 In both languages,

2

3

4

The idea that delayed L1 acquisition may lead to L2-like optionality
has also been discussed by Meisel, Bonnesen and Elsig (2011), who
explored possible effects of intra-language variation in formal vs.
colloquial French in the context of L1 acquisition.
The view that phenomena at the interface between syntax and
discourse are particularly vulnerable is commonly referred to as
the INTERFACE HYPOTHESIS (Sorace & Filiaci, 2006). There are
different views on the question whether articles should be associated
with the internal or the external interface (see White, 2009, for
the distinction between internal and external). Sorace and Serratrice
(2009) have proposed that article use should be associated with the
grammar internal syntax-semantics interface. They assume that this
interface involves less processing costs than constructions at the
external interface because no interaction between the syntactic module
and the external discourse-pragmatic module is required (Sorace &
Serratrice, 2009, p. 204). In contrast, this study assumes that articles
are associated with an external interface. In order to use articles
properly, knowing the semantic features associated with them (e.g.,
specific, generic) is insufficient, as the instantiation of these features
depends on the context.
Articles in both languages are marked for gender and number,
and in German additionally for case. The definite article forms
in Italian are: il (masculine singular), i (masculine plural), la
(feminine singular) and le (feminine plural). The forms lo, l'
and gli are allomorphs. The definite article forms in German

bare noun phrases (NPs) can occur in lexically governed
positions, as in (1). However, as shown in (2), German
but not Italian also allows bare NPs in subject positions.
(In the following, relevant nominals are printed in bold;
ungrammatical and semantically inappropriate sentences
are starred.)
(1) a. Ge.
b. It.

(2) a. Ge.
b. It.

Jeden Tag
isst sie Kartoffeln
Ogni giorno mangia patate.5
(Longobardi, 1994, p. 615)
every day eats.she potatoes
"Every day she eats potatoes."

Katzen sind intelligent.
Gatti sono intelligenti.
cats
are intelligent
"Cats are intelligent."



Chierchia (1998) ascribes these syntactic differences
between "Germanic" and "Romance" to semantic
properties: Germanic nouns have the semantic status of
arguments and can be mapped as such onto syntax.6
Romance nouns are predicates and must be turned into
arguments before they can be mapped onto syntax.
This occurs through the projection of a D-position,
which can be filled by an overt or phonetically empty
determiner. The latter has the status of a null morpheme
and is only allowed in lexically governed positions. This
explains why Italian subjects, unlike objects, can never be
bare.
2.1 Similarities between German and Italian
German and Italian count nouns in the singular must
be preceded by an article. In the absence of a context

5

6

are (for the four cases nominative/genitive/dative/accusative in
this order): der/des/dem/den (masculine singular), die/der/der/die
(feminine singular), das/des/dem/das (neuter singular) and in the
plural die/der/den/die (no gender distinctions). The indefinite
article forms in Italian are: un (masculine singular) and una
(feminine singular), dei (masculine plural) and delle (feminine
plural); un' and degli are allomorphs. The indefinite plural
articles are often referred to as partitive articles (but see
Renzi, 1982, for discussion). The German indefinite articles are
(again, in the order nominative/genitive/dative/accusative case):
ein/eines/einem/ein (masculine and neuter singular) and eine/einer/
einer/eine (feminine singular). German has no indefinite articles in
the plural.
Nonspecific object nouns in Italian can also be preceded by the
partitive article, which is normally not considered obligatory, but may
produce a meaning difference (see Longobardi, 1994, p. 615).
In keeping with the relevant literature (e.g., Chierchia, 1998;
Longobardi, 1994), the terms "Germanic" and "Romance" are used
as if the languages within these families were alike, although in fact
they are not.

Generic subjects in Italian bilinguals
enforcing a particular reading, definite determiner phrases
(DPs) are ambiguous and can be interpreted either
specifically or generically:
(3) a. Ge. Die Katze schlaft viel

( specific/ generic)
b. It. Il gatto dorme molto
the cat
sleeps a lot


( specific/ generic)
"The cat sleeps a lot/Cats sleep a lot."
In the context of specific reference, definite determiners
are obligatory, regardless of whether the noun is singular,
plural count, or mass-again, in both German and Italian,
as shown in (4)-(6):
(4) a. Ge. Die Katze schlaft gerade in meinem Bett.
the cat
sleeps now  in my
bed
( specific/ generic)
b. It. Il gatto sta dormendo nel
mio letto
the cat stays sleeping  in.the my bed
( specific/ generic)
"The cat is sleeping in my bed."

(5) a. Ge. Die Katzen schlafen gerade in meinem
the cats
sleep
now in my
Bett.

bed
( specific/ generic)
b. It. I
gatti stanno dormendo nel
mio
the cats stay
sleeping in.the my
letto.

bed
( specific/ generic)
"The cats are sleeping in my bed."

(6) a. Ge. Der Wein, den wir gerade trinken,
the wine that we now drink
schmeckt gut.

tastes
good
( specific/ generic)
b. It. Il vino che stiamo bevendo
e buono.
the wine that stay
we.drinking
is good

( specific/ generic)
"The wine we are drinking is good."

Whether a nominal has a specific or a generic reading
is not determined by the article alone, but also by the
type of verb, its tense and aspect, or adverbs in the
same clause (e.g., by progressive aspect in the Italian
examples and the adverb gerade "at the moment" in the
corresponding German examples). With plural and mass
nouns, the definite article is sufficient for disambiguation
in German but not in Italian (see examples (7)-(10)
below).

739

2.2 Article use with specific and generic plural and
mass subjects
German and Italian differ when the noun is plural or
mass. In German, bare NPs have a generic interpretation
and DPs have a specific interpretation (see (7a) and (8a)
for plural nouns and (9a) and (10a) for mass nouns).
Italian does not allow bare NPs (see (7b) for plural nouns
and (9b) for mass nouns), while DPs are ambiguous
between the specific and the generic reading (see (8b) and
(10b)).

(7) a. Ge. Katzen schlafen viel. ( specific/ generic)

b. It. Gatti dormono molto.
cats
sleep
a.lot
"Cats sleep a lot."

(8) a. Ge. Die Katzen schlafen 
viel
( specific/ generic)
b. It. I
gatti
dormono molto
the cats
sleep
a.lot

( specific/ generic)
"The cats sleep a lot."
(It. also: "Cats sleep a lot.")

(9) a. Ge.
b. It.

Wein ist gesund.
Vino e sano.
wine is healthy
"Wine is healthy."




( specific/ generic)

(10) a. Ge. Der Wein ist gesund.

( specific/ generic)
b. It. Il vino e sano. 

the wine is healthy ( specific/ generic)
"The wine is healthy."
(It. also: "Wine is healthy.")
A further difference between German and Italian
with regard to plural and mass nouns - relevant to the
study presented below - is the existence of a PARTITIVE
ARTICLE in Italian. The partitive article normally yields an
existential (nonspecific) interpretation and is semantically
inappropriate with generic readings.7 In (11), it is
inappropriate because the property of containing fat is
true of butter in general.
(11)

7



Del burro contiene molti grassi.
of.the butter contains many fats
"Butter contains a lot of fat."

For exceptions see Longobardi (1994, p. 614, footnote).

740

Tanja Kupisch

2.3 Variation in article use with generic plural and
mass subjects
So far, a somewhat idealized picture of article use in Italian
and German has been provided. Things become less neat
once exceptions and dialectal variation are considered.
Contrary to the generalizations stated above, Italian allows
bare subject NPs if they are made to be "syntactically
heavy", e.g., through coordination or modification. These
normally have an existential interpretation, as in (12).
(12) Studenti e
colleghi
hanno telefonato.
students and colleagues have called
(Chierchia, 1998, p. 385)
"Students and colleagues have called."
There is some controversy surrounding the question
of whether bare subject NPs can co-occur with kindselecting predicates (Chierchia, 1998, p. 385). Despite
their heaviness, bare NPs as in (13a) "sound bad", but
can become acceptable with more liberal kind-selecting
predicates and "more heaviness" (cf. (13b)).
(13) a. ??Ragazze in minigonna sono estinte.
girls
in miniskirts are extinct
"Girls in miniskirts are extinct."
b. Insegnanti davvero dediti nella scuola di
teachers
really
loyal in.the school of
oggi sono quasi estinti.
today are almost extinct
(Chierchia, 1998, p. 385)
"Loyal teachers are almost extinct in today's
schools."
The number of occurrences of such bare subject NPs
is probably very low in everyday Italian speech. However,
their existence provides learners with conflicting evidence
as to whether Italian generally tolerates bare NPs, or not.
German, too, shows variation in the use of articles
with generic reference (e.g., Dayal, 2004; Krifka, Pelletier,
Carlson, ter Meulen, Chierchia & Link, 1995; Oosterhof,
2004; ter Meulen, 1995). According to these authors, with
reference to kinds, mass nouns and (to a lesser extent)
plural count nouns, German can employ a definite article:
(14) a. Die Elefanten haben wertvolle Zahne.
the elephants have precious teeth
(ter Meulen, 1995, p. 356)
"Elephants have precious teeth."
b. Die Pandabaren sind vom Aussterben
the pandas
are of.the extinction
bedroht.
threatened
(Krifka et al. 1995, p. 69)
"Pandas face extinction."
On the basis of examples like (14), it is sometimes claimed
that the use of the article in German is "optional" with
generic nominals (e.g., Oosterhof, 2004). Optionality in

such contexts is said to be subject to dialectal variation.
Yet, so far no study has specified the dialects to which
this applies. Intuitively speaking, speakers of NorthWestern German varieties show a strong preference
for generic nominals to be bare. At the same time,
however, Standard German speakers appear to be more
tolerant towards article use in generic DPs than speakers
of English, perhaps owing to their exposure to other
varieties of German, especially in larger urban areas. Most
participants in this study have been exposed to NorthWestern German varieties. Since they have lived in larger
urban areas, we cannot exclude the above-mentioned
tolerance.
To summarize, German allows two different types
of plural nominals in the subject position, realized
syntactically as NPs and DPs. Italian only allows DPs in
subject positions, with very few exceptions. In Standard
German, each type of nominal is associated with one
semantic interpretation: NPs with generic reference, DPs
with specific reference. However, DPs are acceptable with
generic reference in some varieties of German. Hence,
there is variation in both languages, though to a lesser
extent in Italian than in German. Table 1 summarizes the
relevant properties.
3. Predicting cross-linguistic influence
Different scenarios predict the directionality of CLI with
specific and generic plural and mass DPs. Some of these
have been devised in previous studies.
Models of CLI can be distinguished into quantitative
(To what extent does CLI occur?) and qualitative ones
(What are the characteristics of CLI and why does it
occur?). These two types of models do not compete, as the
size of some effect does not generally depend on particular
ways of describing or explaining the effect.
It is proposed here that (when predicting CLI in
adult advanced learners) models which refer to semantic
properties are more appropriate than models referring to
syntactic properties. After all, unlike children and L2ers
at the initial state, advanced learners will already have
acquired the syntax of the language, while they continue
to face problems when syntactic knowledge needs to be
adjusted in the light of additional semantic and pragmatic
information. Although it remains true that qualitative and
quantitative models do not directly compete - in the
sense of excluding one another - it is here assumed that
these types of models can be ranked. In particular, the
assumption is that the qualitative models can be overruled
by language dominance. If so, then CLI only occurs in the
weaker language.8

8

I wish to thank an anonymous reviewer who helped me clarify the
issues presented in this section.

Generic subjects in Italian bilinguals

741

Table 1. Article use with plural and mass nouns in subject position.

Specific reference
Generic reference
Exceptions with generic reference

German

Italian

definite DPs
bare NPs
some varieties of German allow DPs

definite DPs
definite DPs
in very restricted contexts, Italian allows bare NPs

3.1 Economy Hypothesis
According to Chierchia's (1998) Nominal Mapping
Parameter (NMP), Germanic and Romance represent two
parametric settings, differing in terms of the manner in
which semantic properties are mapped onto syntax. In
Romance, nouns emerge from the lexicon as predicates
and in syntax the D-position must be projected to turn
them into arguments. This means that Romance nominals
in argument positions are structurally represented as DPs,
and that nouns are generally preceded by articles or other
determiners.
In Germanic, nouns come out of the lexicon as
arguments or predicates. Predicate-denoting nouns in
Germanic normally have a count denotation, and, as in Romance, need to project D. Argument-denoting nouns, by
contrast, have a kind denotation and are directly mapped
onto syntax, i.e., as NPs, which means that nouns may
remain bare. However, even predicate-denoting nouns
can sometimes be bare: Germanic employs a type-shifter
which can turn bare predicates into arguments in order to
denote kinds. Unlike in Romance, this type-shifter can be
applied at the NP-level and generate the generic reading
without projecting D. Chierchia (1998, p. 393) refers to the
principle responsible for this operation as AVOID STRUC TURE : a determiner is avoided in the generic interpretation
if the same interpretation can be obtained with a bare NP.
Avoid Structure predicts that learners will opt for the
more economical structure whenever possible (see PerezLeroux, Munn, Schmitt & DeIrish, 2004; Serratrice et al.,
2009). This means for German-Italian bilinguals and
L2ers that CLI is likely to occur from German to Italian,
because German allows for structurally less complex
nominals than Italian. The result of such influence would
be the overuse and overacceptance of bare NPs with kind
reference in Italian. Following Serratrice et al. (ibid.,
p. 244) this account is referred to as the ECONOMY
HYPOTHESIS . Note that the Economy Hypothesis should
also be effective in monolingual child language
acquisition (see Gavarro, Perez-Leroux & Roeper, 2006).

3.2 Structural Overlap Hypothesis
Building on Dopke (1998) and Muller (1998), Hulk and
Muller (2000) proposed that partial structural overlap at
the surface level is a precondition for CLI: If one language

has two options, e.g., structures X and Y, and the other
language has only one option, e.g., only structure X, the
option common to both languages, i.e., structure X, will be
overused in the language that has both. By this rationale,
Serratrice et al. (2009) outlined the following with regard
to the distribution of definite articles in plural subjects
in Italian-English bilinguals: CLI should go from Italian
(only definite articles with plural NPs) to English (both
definite plural DPs and bare plural NPs), where definite
plural NPs should become acceptable with a generic
reading.9
German is similar to English in having definite plural
DPs and bare plural NPs. Therefore, if this account applies
to the present case, Italian should not be influenced, as it
is the language with only one option. Importantly, the
Structural Overlap Hypothesis does not make reference
to the INTERPRETATION of definite nominals.
3.3 Semantic Overlap Hypothesis
The Economy Hypothesis and the Structural Overlap
Hypothesis make reference to the two structural
representations, NP and DPs, while focussing on surface
structure. Yet knowledge of the structures is insufficient
for a proper interpretation of nominals in Italian, as
the structures still have to be linked to the appropriate
semantics on the basis of a given context. The overlap
scenario looks different when applied to semantics
than when applied to structure (see Table 2). From
the perspective of DP-semantics, Italian would be the
9

Serratrice et al. (2009) refer to this account as the SUBSET - SUPERSET
HYPOTHESIS (ibid., p. 244). The use of the terms Subset and
Superset would be somewhat misleading in the present context,
as the interpretation of the Subset Principle commonly found in
the L2 acquisition literature (e.g., White, 1989) is different from
the concept of Structural Overlap in the context of bilingualism
research. According to the Subset Principle, acquisition is guaranteed
by exposure to positive evidence. Accordingly, the scenario for the
phenomenon investigated here is as follows: If the L1 has two options
with respect to a given property (NPs and DPs) and the L2 has only one
of these (DPs), all L2 evidence for that property will be consistent with
the L1 grammar. Due to the lack of positive evidence contradicting the
L1 grammar, learners will face difficulties resetting the L1 parameter.
Conversely, if the L1 grammar has only one option (DPs) and the
L2 grammar has two (NPs and DPs), positive evidence can be used
to reject the L1 analysis and motivate parameter resetting in the L2.
Since advanced learners are dealt with here, one may assume that
parameter (re)setting is not the crucial issue.

742

Tanja Kupisch

Table 2. Predictions for cross-linguistic
influence: Structural vs. semantic overlap.

Structure
Semantics

Italian

German

Overused
property

DPs
specific, generic

DPs, NPs
specific

DPs
specific

language with two interpretative options (specific and
generic) and German the language with only one
interpretative option (specific). Under the assumption that
the option that is common to both languages (i.e., specific)
is extended to the language that has two options, one
expects that Italian is influenced by German, the effect
being that DPs might be interpreted as having specific
reference in Italian, even if a generic interpretation is also
possible or required.
3.4 Dominance Hypothesis
At the same time, language dominance may be crucial
for the occurrence of CLI. If this were the case,
Italian should only be affected in the group of Germandominant bilinguals and L2ers, but not in Italian-dominant
bilinguals.
To sum up, there are four possible scenarios predicting
the direction of CLI with subject nominals in German-
Italian bilinguals and L2ers:
* The E CONOMY H YPOTHESIS predicts that German
influences Italian, resulting in the overuse and
overacceptance of NPs in Italian, specifically in
generic contexts, where German requires them.
* The S TRUCTURAL OVERLAP H YPOTHESIS predicts
that there is no influence from German to Italian.
* The S EMANTIC OVERLAP H YPOTHESIS predicts
influence from German to Italian: Bilinguals should
be more inclined to interpret definite plural and
mass DPs in Italian as specific because this is the
interpretation that Italian and German share.
* The D OMINANCE H YPOTHESIS predicts that Italian
is only affected in German-dominant simultaneous
bilinguals and L2 Italian learners.
4. Previous research on the acquisition of generics
An increasing number of studies has been dedicated
to article use and interpretation in generic contexts in
monolingual, bilingual and L2 acquisition. Although the
focus of the present study is adult simultaneous bilinguals
and L2ers, the results from monolingual L1 acquisition
studies retain their relevance, as they provide information

about the age at which children may be expected to use
and interpret articles correctly. Moreover, they can help
uncover potential task effects.

4.1 Monolingual studies
Gelman and Raman (2003, pp. 314-315) investigated how
English-learning children interpret generic utterances and
which cues they pay attention to. One of their tasks
displayed pictures of atypical or unusual characters,
e.g., two tiny elephants or two cats without tails. After
introducing these characters (Here are two elephants), a
simple yes/no question was posed. Crucially, this question
was presented in a way that used either the generic form
(elephants) or the nongeneric form (the elephants), e.g.,
Now I am going to ask you a question about elephants. Are
elephants big? or Now I am going to ask you a question
about the elephants. Are the elephants big? Two-yearold English-learning children were shown to be able to
make use of linguistic form to distinguish specific from
generic readings. Clear overall discrimination patterns
were observed in children and adults, with individual
response patterns showing that a specific bias was more
common than a generic bias.
Perez-Leroux et al. (2004) came to different results in
a study of monolingual Spanish- and English-speaking
children. To investigate the status of definite plural DPs in
generic contexts they designed eight stories containing
two atypical members of a kind. As in the task by
Gelman and Raman (2003), participants were presented
with yes/no questions about the atypical characters (e.g.,
spotted zebras, cats who love to be in the water, vegetarian
tigers). The answer to the question served to identify the
semantic status of the noun phrase. Affirmative answers to
questions about canonical properties of the kind (Do the
zebras have stripes?) and, conversely, negative answers to
questions about the atypical (i.e., noncanonical) property
(e.g., Do the zebras have spots?) were taken to indicate
acceptance of a generic interpretation of a noun phrase.
Results showed a strong preference among the Spanishspeaking children (ages 3;5-5;0 and 6;5-7;0) to interpret
DPs (e.g., los tigres) as generic in contexts where
either specific or generic interpretations were possible.
Unexpectedly, the English-speaking children (ages 4;4-
6;0 and 6;5-7;3) also gave a large proportion of generic
answers (60-70%) although only specific interpretations
were appropriate (Perez-Leroux et al., 2004, p.5.). For
instance, when shown pictures with spotted zebras and
asked Do the zebras have stripes? they answered "yes".
As the authors note (ibid., p.11), the preference for generic
interpretations may have resulted from introducing the
characters by name. For example, the children saw a
picture with spotted zebras while listening to the following
story and question.

Generic subjects in Italian bilinguals
(15) Zippy the zebra and Suzy the zebra are spotted.
The giraffe wonders why they look different. Now
let me ask you some questions. Do the zebras have
spots? . . .
Clearly, once a character has been introduced by
name, referring to them with a definite DP is at least
pragmatically marked, if not inappropriate.
To summarize, L1 acquisition studies have produced
conflicting results with respect to children's interpretation
of NPs and DPs in Romance and Germanic languages in
specific and generic contexts. Gelman and Raman have
shown sensitivity to the presence/absence of articles as
a cue for specific/generic readings for children as young
as 2-3 years, while Perez-Leroux et al. have shown that
older children (4;5-7;3) still had problems. The tendency
for the children in the former study was to overaccept
specific readings; the children in the latter study tended to
overaccept generic readings. Comparing the two studies,
which differed in terms of context length, one might
suspect that there is a stronger reliance on the picture
(creating a specific bias) with shorter contexts.

4.2 Bilingual studies
Kupisch and Pierantozzi (2010) tested 6-10-year-old
German-Italian bilingual children, monolingual children
and adult controls in both German and Italian. They
adapted Perez-Leroux et al.'s (2004) design to investigate
the interpretation of definite plural DPs. The children
grew up in monolingual Italian and bi-national families in
Germany and were generally more proficient in German.
Unlike in Perez-Leroux et al. (2004), where there was a
separate story for each picture shown, pictures in this study
were accompanied by a coherent story of two children,
who set out on adventures on a Caribbean island where
they met atypical characters. An example of a context and
test question in Italian is given in (16a) and (16b). The
associated picture displayed witches flying on vacuum
cleaners.
(16) a. Ora i bambini sono esausti di tante
now the children are tired of many
avventure e vogliono tornare
dai loro
adventures and want
return.INF to.the their
genitori. Per fortuna arrivano due streghe
parents luckily
arrive two witches
buone che gli
offrono un passaggio fino
good who them offer a ride
until
all' hotel.
to.the hotel
"Now the children are tired of all their
adventures and want to return to their
parents. Fortunately, two friendly witches
come by and offer them a ride to the hotel."

743

b. Volano sulla scopa le streghe?
fly
on.the broom the witches
"Do witches/the witches fly on brooms?"
Since definite DPs can only have a specific reading in
Standard German, overacceptance of generic readings
was unexpected here. In contrast, a preference for the
specific reading in Italian (where both specific and generic
readings are possible) was expected because of CLI from
German, the stronger language of most children.
Similar to Perez-Leroux's Spanish subjects, the
monolingual child and adult participants showed a generic
bias in Italian. Moreover, the bilingual children gave
more generic interpretations in Italian than in German,
constituting evidence which can be interpreted in favour
of language separation. Interestingly, in both Italian
and German, the bilingual children often explicitly
commented on the perceived ambiguity of definite subject
DPs, such as (16), which implies that both readings were
available to them.
In German, child and adult participants overaccepted
generic readings with definite plural subject DPs, adults
doing so less often (20% of cases) than monolingual and
bilingual children (both 37% of cases). This indicates
that using the presence/absence of an article as a clue
for a specific/generic reference seems to be acquired
late by Germanic-learning children, likely after school
enrolment. However, with increasing age, the children
attributed comparatively fewer generic readings to definite
DPs, and this change in the rate of attribution tended
to occur at earlier ages in monolingual children. In
general, this study raises the question whether the
discrimination patterns witnessed by the bilinguals'
different interpretation preferences in each language will
change at later ages, with increasing exposure to German.
Unlike all previous child studies, Serratrice et al.
(2009) used an acceptability judgment task (AJT) to
investigate article use with specific and generic subject
nominals. Their study tested whether simultaneous
English-Italian bilinguals (aged 6;2-10;10) accept
ungrammatical Italian sentences with a bare NP, such as
(17), when influenced by English:
(17) It.  In genere squali sono pericolosi.
"In general sharks are dangerous."
The test sentences were preceded by an initial adjunct
that was either compatible with the specific reading (It.
qui/En. here) or with the generic reading (It. in genere/En.
in general). Results indicated that, in Italian, bilingual
children (especially in the UK) were significantly more
likely than monolingual children to accept ungrammatical
bare nouns in a generic context. All English-Italian
bilinguals performed worse in the generic condition than
in the specific condition. Also, their accuracy scores
differed significantly vis-a-vis bilingual Italian-Spanish

744

Tanja Kupisch

and monolingual Italian controls. These results can be
interpreted as evidence in support of CLI from English,
raising the question whether bilinguals can recover from
CLI at later ages.
Montrul and Ionin (2010) investigated generic
nominals in adult Spanish heritage speakers living in the
US. The authors used a truth value judgment task (TVJT)
with atypical characters and contextualized questions,
similar to the studies summarized above, as well as an AJT.
Participants were shown to be influenced by English when
interpreting and using definite articles in generic contexts
in Spanish. In the TVJT, Spanish DPs were interpreted
as generic in 57% of all cases. In the AJT, participants
failed to correct ungrammatical bare generic NPs 50% of
the time. In contrast, they were not influenced by Spanish
when interpreting and using English nominals. This study
makes no prediction as to whether deviances from the
monolingual norm might also occur in bilinguals with the
same language combination but for whom Spanish is not
the minority language.
Generics have also been studied in the L2 acquisition
of Romance and Germanic languages (Ionin & Montrul,
2010; Slabakova, 2006; Snape, Garcia Mayo & Gurel,
2009). All studies show evidence of transfer from the L1,
but - importantly for the present study - also evidence of
recovery from transfer at very advanced levels.
The research summarized above raises two questions
which are addressed in this study.
* Does bilingualism lead to incomplete acquisition of
generic subject DPs in a Romance language when it
is in contact with a Germanic language?
* Could methodological problems have obscured
previous results (e.g., did the use of contexts in the
form of stories create a generic bias)?
5. The study on article use in specific and generic
plural DPs
5.1 Participants
This study involves three different groups of adult
participants who were recruited in Germany and Italy: two
groups of early simultaneous bilinguals (2L1ers) and L2
learners of Italian (L2ers) with German as their L1.10 All

bilinguals grew up in bi-national families according to the
ONE PERSON - ONE LANGUAGE STRATEGY and regularly
used both languages at least until school age.11 The two
groups of 2L1ers differed with respect to their dominant
language. Language dominance was assessed through a
timed cloze test with 45 blanks which required filling in
free morphemes and content words.12 All 2L1ers scored
better in the language of their childhood environment,
which will therefore be considered "dominant". The
bilingual participants' speech was also rated for foreign
accent by native speakers of the respective languages.
These ratings re-confirmed the conclusions arrived at by
the cloze test.
Early bilinguals (2L1s) with Italian as dominant
language
The bilinguals with Italian as their dominant language
(n = 8) were between 18 and 38 years old (mean age:
27). All but one participant were recruited in Italy and
had never spent more than six consecutive months in
Germany. Five participants went to a German-Italian
bilingual school. All participants in this group used more
Italian than German in their daily lives, and self-reportedly
felt more at ease when using Italian. All claimed to have
good or very good knowledge of English. One participant
in this group was recruited in Germany. He grew up in
Italy but moved to Germany at the age of 17, where
he continued to live for 21 years. Although he reported
to use more German than Italian on a daily basis, and
to feel equally confident using either language, he was
more proficient in Italian according to the cloze test (48%
and 75% accuracy in German and Italian, respectively).
Moreover, 19 in 20 raters considered his German to sound
foreign, compared to five in 20 raters judging his Italian
to sound foreign.
Early bilinguals (2L1ers) with German as dominant
language
The 2L1ers with German as dominant language (n =
12) were between 19 and 39 years old (mean age: 28).
Participants in this group were recruited in Germany,
although one was a resident of Italy at the time of testing.
All but one had grown up in Germany.13 Participants
11

10

This study did not include a monolingual control group. This
can be justified as follows. As Grosjean (1989) notes, a bilingual
cannot simply be considered "two monolinguals in one". Therefore,
monolinguals can never be a perfect match for bilinguals. Moreover,
in the present study, bilinguals who grew up in Italy show ceiling
performance (as monolinguals would be expected to do), and they
have the advantage (vis-a-vis monolinguals) of having been exposed
to German from birth. Finally, the concept of "the monolingual native
speaker" has meanwhile been controversially discussed, for example,
at the Eurosla roundtable in Stockholm, 2011.

12

13

Choosing this restricted set of bilinguals occurred in an attempt
to guarantee exposure to both languages from birth. This is not
guaranteed for bilinguals who grew up in families where both parents
speak the minority language.
The cloze test was created within the context of the research project
E11 (see Acknowledgments footnote above). Standardized tests were
not used, because the aim was to construct tests with comparable
difficulty and text type in three languages (German, French, and
Italian). The German and Italian tests were adapted to the French
one previously created by Tremblay (2011).
This speaker grew up in Belgium with an Italian father and a German
mother. Besides German and Italian, he was also very proficient in

Generic subjects in Italian bilinguals

745

Table 3. Overview of participants.

n
Country of residence during childhood
Age of onset Italian
Age of onset German
Age at testing (years)
Cloze test Italian (%)
Cloze test German (%)

2L1 strong Italian

2L1 strong German

L2 Italian

8
Italy
0
0
27 (range 18-38)
84 (range 68-95)
57 (range 15-80)

12
Germany (but see footnote 13)
0
0
28 (range 19-39)
66 (range 40-91)
85 (range 71-97)

15
Germany
21 (range 15-38)
0
37 (range 27-46)
74 (range 46-95)
92 (range 57-100)

had spent between two consecutive months and six
consecutive years in Italy (mean: 2 years). All but the
Italian resident used more German than Italian on a
daily basis. As for language preference, six participants
reportedly felt more at ease when using German, three did
not provide a statement, two felt more at ease when using
Italian, one felt equally comfortable using both languages.
The latter three turned out to be more proficient in German
(as measured by the cloze test and foreign accent rating).
The participant recruited in Italy showed only minimal
differences between his two native languages. None of
the participants went to a bilingual school, but two were
students of Italian language and literature at the University
of Hamburg. All participants reported to have good or
very good knowledge of English and good or very good
knowledge of Spanish or French. Two of them considered
their level of English higher than their level of Italian,
while ten considered themselves to be more proficient in
Italian than in any foreign language they knew.
Second language learners (L2ers) of Italian
Preconditions for the L2ers' participation were that they
were advanced speakers (based on self-assessment) and
had not received any Italian input before the age of 11.
Participants in this group (n = 15) were between 27 and
46 years old (mean age: 37) and were first exposed to
Italian between the ages of 15 and 38 years (mean age: 21).
They had learnt Italian for between six and 30 years (mean:
16) and had spent either no time or up to 14 consecutive
years in Italy (mean: 4 years). Five participants had been
recruited in Italy and 10 in Germany; among the latter
some had lived in Italy for several years. All L2ers were
very fluent in Italian and had taken Italian language classes
at some point. Nevertheless, naturalistic exposure was the
prevalent input source for most of them. According to
the cloze test, all L2ers were more proficient in their L1
German despite their high proficiency in Italian.
Information presented in this section is summarized
in Table 3. Two points are particularly important for
French and English. Admittedly, multilingualism is a confounding
factor in this study.

the remainder of the study. First, the language of the
participants' childhood environment determined their
dominant language during adulthood. Second, the range
obtained from the cloze test results indicates considerable
variation in proficiency among the 2L1ers with weak
Italian and the L2ers.
5.2 Acceptability judgment task (AJT)
Test items
All participants completed an AJT with 42 items targeting
article use in specific and generic subject contexts.14
A total of eight sentences were constructed with a
context calling for a specific interpretation (SPECIFIC
CONDITION ); 34 test sentences were constructed with
a context calling for a generic interpretation (GENERIC
CONDITION ).
Of the 34 test items in the generic condition, 17
contained grammatical subject DPs with a definite article,
as in (18). These 17 items (nine with mass nouns, eight
with count nouns) tested whether participants would
accept subject DPs with definite articles, although the
equivalent German sentences do not require an article.
(18) Grammatical subject DP with definite article,
generic context
a. Uno studio ha mostrato una cosa interessante.
a
study has shown a thing interesting
Gli uomini cucinano meglio.
the. men
cook
better
"A study has shown something interesting: Men
are better cooks."
b. A scuola abbiamo parlato delle spezie.
at school have.we talked of.the spices
Il basilico e originario dell' Asia tropicale.
the basil is originated of.the Asia tropical
"At school we talked about spices. Basil
originates in the tropical part of Asia."

14

The AJT also tested other phenomena, e.g., word order and gender
marking, but these will not be reported here.

746

Tanja Kupisch

Of the remaining 17 items, eight were ungrammatical
containing a bare subject NP, as in (19), and nine were
inappropriate containing an indefinite-marked subject DP,
as in (20). Again, subject nominals were constructed with
mass nouns (n = 9) and plural nouns (n = 8). The
eight bare NPs tested whether participants would correct
ungrammatical bare NPs in cases where German requires
them. The nine indefinite-marked DPs were included to
control whether participants paid attention to an article
that is semantically inappropriate in the given context.
(Because the context is generic, the equivalent German
sentences require bare NPs).
(19) Ungrammatical bare subject NP, generic context
a. Davvero non lo sapevi? Patate crescono
really
not it knew.you potatoes grow
sotto terra.
under earth
"Really, you didn't know that? Potatoes grow
under the ground."
b. A scuola abbiamo parlato delle spezie.
at school have.we talked of.the spices
Zafferano si usa per fare il risotto.
saffron
is used for make the risotto
"At school we talked about spices. Saffron is
used for risotto."
(20) Inappropriate subject DP with indefinite article,
generic context
a. Gli esperti degli animali dicono: Delle
the experts of.the animals say
of.the
lepri sono animali solitari.
rabbits are animals lone
"Animal experts say: Rabbits are loners."
b. La ricerca ha provato una cosa. Della
the research has proved a
thing of.the
cioccolata rende felici.
chocolate makes happy
"The research proved one thing. Chocolate
makes happy."
The remaining eight stimuli contained sentences testing
whether participants faced problems using or not using
a definite article when the preceding context was
biased towards specific reference (see (21)-(22)).15
Associative uses of the definite article were constructed,
because using the same DP in the context and test
sentences might otherwise have influenced participants'
judgments.
15

For this condition, fewer items were used because subjects were not
expected to experience difficulties. Many of the remaining stimuli of
the AJT (see footnote 14 above) contained specific DPs; hence this
imbalance was not seen to be problematic. Note that it had originally
been intended to subdivide generic items into mass and plural items
due to relevant differences in the corresponding German nominals.
However, this distinction turned out to be irrelevant.

(21) Grammatical subject DP with definite article,
specific context
a. Anna non puo cucinare perche le padelle
Anna not can cook
because the pans
sono sparite.
are disappeared
"Anna cannot cook because the pans
disappeared."
b. Ora capisco
perche la torta fa
now understand.I why
the cake is
schifo.
Lo zucchero era scaduto
disgusting the sugar
was bad
nel
2001.
in.the 2001
"Now I understand why the cake is disgusting.
The sugar went bad in 2011."
(22) Ungrammatical bare subject DP, specific context
a. Daria si
rifiuta di mangiare perche
Daria REFL refuses to eat because
piatti sono sporchi.
plates are dirty
"Daria refuses to eat because (the) plates
are dirty."
b. Ora capisco
perche il dolce fa
now understand.I why
the cake is
schifo!
Farina era scaduta l'anno
disgusting flour
was bad
the.year
scorso.
last
"Now I see why the cake is disgusting! (The)
flour went bad last year."
Items were constructed in pairs; each grammatical/
acceptable sentence had an ungrammatical/inappropriate
counterpart similar in length, context sentence and
vocabulary.
Procedure
Stimulus sentences appeared in random order and were
presented both auditorily and in writing (yellow type
on a black computer screen). Most test sentences were
preceded by a context sentence in a different colour.16
Participants were instructed to read and listen to each
example, and to repeat the yellow sentence when they
thought it sounded good, else correct it when they
thought it sounded bad. Response time was limited and
corresponded to three times the duration of the test
sentence read by a native speaker. If participants failed to
respond within this limit, their response was not recorded
or recorded incompletely.

16

Sometimes the context or items were very short and integrated into
the sequence to be judged.

Generic subjects in Italian bilinguals

747

Table 4. Responses in the AJT (accuracy in %).
Grammatical condition

2L1 strong Italian (n = 8)
2L1 weak Italian (n = 12)
L2 Italian (n = 15)

Ungrammatical condition

Specific context/
def. DP (n = 4)

Generic context/
def. DP (n = 17)

Specific context/
bare NP (n = 4)

Generic context/
bare NP (n = 8)

Generic context/
indef. DP (n = 9)

32/32 (100%)
48/48 (100%)
59/59 (100%)

135/136 (99%)
203/204 (100%)
252/253 (100%)

32/32 (100%)
43/48 (90%)
56/58 (97%)

61/63 (97%)
31/95 (33%)
66/118 (56%)

71/71 (100%)
80/103 (78%)
116/135 (86%)

Figure 1. Appropriate corrections of bare NPs in specific and generic contexts.

Results
For the data analysis, the number of responses
to acceptable and unacceptable/ungrammatical items
were counted separately. Participants' corrections were
examined and classified as relevant or irrelevant.
Answers which failed to correct missing or semantically
inappropriate articles in subject nominals were taken
to indicate lack of sensitivity towards the phenomenon
investigated. For example, sometimes participants
corrected the gender of a given indefinite article instead
of correcting it to a definite article. Items for which
participants failed to provide an answer within the time
limit were removed from the analysis.17
Results of the AJT (mean accuracy in %) are shown
in Table 4, indicating correct repetition in the case of
grammatical contexts and expected correction in the case
of inappropriate or ungrammatical items.
In only one case was a correct sentence repeated
incorrectly. Therefore, grammatical contexts do not reveal
differences between the three groups of learners (and
will not be discussed further). Comparisons between
the three ungrammatical contexts are illustrated in
17

This explains why the number of items counted in Table 4 does
not always equal the number of stimuli multiplied by participants.
Alternatively, each failure to provide an answer within the given time
could have been counted as "failure to provide a `correct' answer".
However, there were only few such cases overall, some of which
resulted from technical difficulties.

Figures 1 and 2. A multilevel logistic regression analysis
was carried out to determine whether there were
significant contrasts between the three conditions and
between the three groups.
A comparison between specific and nonspecific
ungrammatical contexts (see Figure 1) did not yield a
reliable test result for the 2L1ers with Italian as their
stronger language.18 The same comparison was highly
significant for the 2L1ers with Italian as the weaker
language (B = 5.24, SE = 1.28, z = 4.09, p < .0001)
and for the L2ers (B = 4.49, SE = 1.08, z = 4.16,
p < .0001). Across-group comparison of corrections in
specific contexts did not yield a reliable test result with
respect to the contrast between the two groups of 2L1ers
and between the L2ers and the 2L1ers with Italian as
their stronger language due to ceiling performance of
the latter group. The difference between the 2L1s with
Italian as their weaker language and the L2ers was not
significant (B = -1.26, SE = 1.41, z = -0.89, p > .05). As
for corrections in generic contexts, contrasts were highly
significant between the two groups of 2L1s (B = -6.74,
SE = 1.66, z = -0.06, p < .0001) and moreover between
the 2L1s with Italian as their stronger language and the
18

This result does not imply anything about the significance of the
contrast. Rather, it indicates that the contrast is untestable with the
statistical method used. The same is true for the other contrasts
reported below in which the 2L1s showed ceiling performance of
100%.

748

Tanja Kupisch

Figure 2. Appropriate corrections of bare NPs and indefinite DPs in generic contexts.

L2ers (B = 4.75, SE = 1.62, z = 2.94, p < .005), but not
between the 2L1s with Italian as their weaker language
and the L2ers (B = -2.0, SE = 1.07, z = -1.87, p > .05).
Comparison between the corrections of bare NPs and
of indefinite-marked DPs in generic contexts, illustrated
in Figure 2, did not yield a reliable result for the 2L1ers
with Italian as their stronger language, again due to
ceiling performance. In contrast, comparison was highly
significant for the 2L1ers with Italian as their weaker
language (B = 2.92, SE = 0.44, z = 6.71, p < .0001) and
for the L2ers (B = 2.93, SE = 0.49, z = 5.97, p < .0001).
Comparison across groups in the indefinite condition did
not yield reliable test results between the 2L1ers with
Italian as the stronger language and each of the other
two groups. Comparison was not significant between the
2L1ers with Italian as their weaker language and the L2ers
(B = -1.46, SE = 1.01, z = -1.45, p < .5).
There was considerable individual variation, especially
within the groups of L2ers and 2L1ers with Italian as
the weaker language. While all bilingual participants who
grew up in Italy corrected at least 75% of bare nouns in
the test condition, only two out of 12 heritage speakers
did so (17%), compared to seven out of 15 L2ers (47%).
Summarizing, there were no differences across
groups with respect to grammatical contexts. Here, all
participants showed target-like performance. Bilinguals
with Italian as the stronger language (i.e., those who
grew up in Italy) also performed in a target-like manner
in all remaining conditions. In contrast, bilinguals with
Italian as the weaker language and L2ers faced problems
correcting bare and indefinite-marked nouns. These two
groups showed qualitatively similar tendencies, correcting
significantly more bare NPs in specific contexts than in
generic contexts, and significantly more indefinite DPs
than bare NPs in the generic condition. Overall, the L2ers
corrected more ungrammatical bare NPs and semantically
inappropriate DPs than the bilinguals with Italian as the
weaker language, but this contrast was not statistically
significant.

5.3 Truth value judgment task (TVJT)
Test items
The truth value judgment task was modelled on similar
tasks used by Gelman and Raman (2003) and PerezLeroux et al. (2004) with the methodological changes
outlined below. Twelve coloured pictures were designed.
Every picture showed three objects or characters of one
kind, each with two anomalies (e.g., blue sunflowers
in the desert; kangaroos with ties but without tails,
flying monkeys eating ice-cream). Each picture was
accompanied by three statements, resulting in a total of
36 statements (see Figure 3).
The 36 statements divide into three conditions. Statements in all conditions were balanced for truth value: half
the statements were true with respect to the picture but
false with respect to facts, and vice versa for the other
half. All sentences were grammatical.
The major condition displayed statements (n = 12)
with definite DPs, such as those in (23) below. Recall that
these can have a specific OR a generic reading in Italian.
The assigned truth value served to identify the semantic
status of the DP.
(23) a. Picture showing tailless kangaroos with
ties (Figure 3), test condition
I canguri hanno la coda.
the kangaroos have the tail
(F = specific, T = generic)
"The kangaroos have tails./Kangaroos have
tails."
b. Picture showing blue sunflowers, test condition
I girasoli
sono blu.
the sunflowers are blue
(T = specific, F = generic)
"The sunflowers are blue./Sunflowers are blue."
The response "true" (T) to a statement about canonical
properties of the kind (e.g., kangaroos having tails, as in
(23a)) indicates a generic interpretation of the subject DP;

Generic subjects in Italian bilinguals

749

The third condition consisted of singular controls (n =
12). These were subdivided depending on whether their
truth value could in principle be gathered from the picture,
see (25a) below, or whether their truth value required
world knowledge that could not be gained from the picture,
see (25b).
(25) a. Picture with three fishes; the rightmost fish turns
its head towards the left, singular control
Il pesce di destra guarda a sinistra.
the fish of right looks to left
(T = specific)
"The rightmost fish looks to the left."
b. Picture with tailless kangaroos (see Figure 3)
Il canguro vive in Peru.
the kangaroo lives in Peru
(T = generic)
"The kangaroo lives in Peru./Kangaroos live in
Peru."

Figure 3. Test item in TVJT.

the response "false" (F) indicates a specific interpretation.
Conversely, the response "true" to a statement about
atypical (i.e., noncanonical) properties of the kind (e.g.,
blue sunflowers, as in (23b)) indicates a specific reading;
the response "false" indicates acceptance of a generic
interpretation.
Importantly, the major condition indicates a
"preference" for one of two possible readings of definite
DPs in Italian. It was expected that different preferences
arise depending on whether there is CLI from Standard
German, where such DPs can only have specific readings.
The second condition contained demonstrative controls
(n = 12), which always yielded specific readings. Again,
sentences displayed made statements either about a
canonical property of the kind, as in (24a) - and were
false with respect to the picture - or about a noncanonical
property, as in (24b) - and then were true with respect to
the picture.
(24) a. Picture showing blue sunflowers, demonstrative
control
Questi girasoli
sono gialli.
these sunflowers are yellow
(F = specific,  T = generic)
"These sunflowers are yellow."
b. Picture showing tailless kangaroos with ties
(Figure 3), demonstrative control
Questi canguri portano delle cravatte.
these kangaroos wear
of.the ties
(T = specific,  F = generic)
"These kangaroos wear ties."

Such items controlled whether the participants paid
attention to the meaning of the sentences. For example, if
a participant answered "false" with respect to (25a), she
may not have looked at the picture carefully enough. If
a participant did not know the answer to the question in
(25b), he may have lacked the required world knowledge
or may not have paid attention. A further purpose of the
controls was to increase participants' awareness that test
statements could in principle be interpreted with respect
to the picture or with respect to the world.
Singular controls always appeared between the other
two statements, while the order of statements containing
plural articles and demonstratives varied between the other
two positions. Out of three statements, at least one (and
maximally two) could be interpreted as true. (In each
picture, demonstrative and singular controls had different
truth values.)
Five methodological decisions were made which
distinguish the design from previous studies. First, prior
to testing, participants were explicitly instructed that
sentences could either be related to the picture or to the
world. The reason for this instruction was that during the
pilot some participants gave one and the same type of
interpretation throughout the test (only specific or only
generic). The disadvantage is that participants might have
intuitively guessed what the test was about. Second, as
mentioned above, participants were instructed to listen to
all three statements before giving a truth value judgment.
This way, they heard and read sentences containing subject
DPs of different types (e.g., with a demonstrative and
a definite article) one after the other. This measure
was used to make the different surface structure of
sentences as evident as possible. Third, there was no
context in the form of a preceding story or introductory
sentence in order to avoid a bias towards either the
generic or the specific reading through context. Fourth,
there were no semantic clues that could have triggered

750

Tanja Kupisch
Table 5. Responses in the TVJT.a
Plural DPs
(% specific answers)

2L1 strong Italian (n = 8)
2L1 weak Italian (n = 12)
L2 Italian (n = 15)

Singular DPs
(% correct answers)

Demonstrative
control
(n = 12)

Test item with
definite article
(n = 12)

Only specific
answer possible
(n = 6)

Only generic
answer possible
(n = 6)

85/90 (94%)
135/140 (96%)
168/180 (93%)

34/88 (39%)
77/142 (54%)
120/179 (67%)

45/45 (100%)
69/70 (99%)
88/90 (98%)

39/44 (89%)
64/71 (90%)
79/90 (88%)

a

Object DPs in the test sentences contained either a singular definite DP or a plural indefinite DP (compare (i) and (ii)):
(i) I cavalli portano degli occhiali.
the horses wear of-the glasses
(ii) Gli uccelli hanno il becco.
the birds have the beak
This variation between indefinite and definite object DPs was included to test whether definite object DPs would consistently bias speakers'
judgments towards the specific reading and definite object DPs towards the generic reading. This was not the case, although all groups were
more inclined to give a generic response when the object DP was definite.

specific or generic interpretations, such as "here" or "in
general". Fifth, each character had two anomalies, so the
test question and the demonstrative question referred to
different properties.

Procedure
Stimuli were presented in PowerPoint, and participants
were instructed that they would see a series of pictures,
each with three statements they could hear and read, and
which they had to judge as being true or false. They were
explicitly instructed that statements either could or could
not be related to pictures, and that they had to listen to
and read all three statements before making a judgment.
They were also told that at least one but maximally two
statements were true. There were two semi-randomized
test versions.

Results
Responses were counted as specific interpretations if
they were congruous with the pictures, and as generic
interpretations if they were not. In case participants
changed their mind, their final judgment was counted.
Table 5 summarizes the results.
Statements with singular DPs for which the proper
judgments could be found in the pictures yielded
mostly specific interpretations (98-100%). Statements
with singular DPs that could not be judged on the basis
of the pictures (but required world knowledge) yielded
mostly generic responses (around 90%). The number of
incorrect judgments was slightly higher for the latter,
probably because some participants lacked the required
world knowledge (e.g., "The horse was domesticated more
than 500 years ago").

Control sentences containing plural demonstratives
yielded predominantly specific answers (93-96%).19
In the test condition, where specific and generic
interpretations were possible, 2L1ers with Italian as
the stronger language showed a preference for generic
readings (61% of all cases). 2L1s with Italian as their
weaker language accepted both readings without showing
a clear preference for any of the two (46% generic
interpretations), while L2ers showed a specific bias (33%
generic interpretations) (see Figure 4).
A multiple logistic regression analysis did not yield
significant differences between the individual groups in
the demonstrative condition, neither between the two
bilingual groups (B = -0.59, SE = 0.73, z = -0.81, p >
.5) nor between the 2L1s with strong Italian and the
L2ers (B = 0.18, SE = 0.63, z = 0.28, p > .5), nor
between the 2L1 with weak Italian and the L2ers (B =
0-.77, SE = 0.61, z = -1.26, p > .5). In the condition
with definite articles, the comparison was not significant
between the two bilingual groups (-1.24, SE = 0.87, z =
-1.43, p > .5) and between bilinguals with Italian as the
weaker language and the L2ers (B = 0.78, SE = 0.73,
z = 1.06, p > .05). Only between 2L1ers with Italian as
the stronger language and L2ers did the comparison yield
a significant difference (B = -2.01, SE = 0.83, z = -0.42,
p < .05).
Noticeable individual variation could be observed. The
number of subjects who interpreted 75% or more of
statements with plural subject DPs as generic was four
out of eight Italian-dominant subjects, four out of 12
19

Generic answers in this condition occurred mostly for one item
(Questi uccelli hanno le branche "These birds have claws"). A
plausible explanation is that some participants did not know the
word branche "claws".

Generic subjects in Italian bilinguals

751

Figure 4. Specific answers with demonstrative plurals and definite articles in TVJT.

bilinguals with Italian as the weaker language, compared
to only one out of 15 L2ers.
Comparing the results of the two test modes, the AJT
shows more quantitative similarities between bilinguals
with strong Italian and L2ers (i.e. more than between
the two groups of 2L1ers), while the TVJT shows more
quantitative similarities between the two groups of 2L1ers
(i.e. more than between the bilinguals with strong Italian
and the L2ers). One could ask whether these findings
point to a disadvantage for bilingual speakers in AJTs
as compared to tasks requiring more intuitive judgments.
What speaks against this conjecture is that participants
heard and read sentences in both the AJT and the TVJT,
and had to provide spoken answers in both cases. However,
a difference between the two tests was that, in the TVJT,
participants could determine the speed themselves and
then tended to respond rather quickly. In contrast, the
response time in the AJT was pre-programmed and
appeared to be too long for many participants. The
relatively long response time in the AJT may have induced
access to explicit knowledge, which would have been
especially advantageous for L2ers, most of whom had
some formal instruction in Italian.

5.4 Summary
The AJT has shown that bilingual German-Italian
speakers who grew up in Italy perform at ceiling
(accuracy 97-100%) in judging the grammaticality and
acceptability of bare, indefinite and definite nominals in
Italian, regardless of how these properties are realized
in German. L2ers and bilinguals with Italian as their
weaker language accept grammatical DPs regardless of
how these are realized in German. However, the latter face
significantly more problems in correcting ungrammatical
and inappropriate Italian DPs whose German equivalents
have a different structure, compared with correcting DPs
whose German equivalents look the same. In the TVJT

definite plural articles were more likely to be interpreted
as generic provided Italian was the stronger language.

6. Discussion
Returning to the questions raised in the beginning,
and based on the results presented in the previous
section, implications for models of CLI, methodology and
terminology are now discussed.

6.1 Differences between the weaker and the
stronger language
German-Italian bilinguals who grew up in Italy have
been shown to perform at ceiling (accuracy 97-100%)
in judging the grammaticality and acceptability of bare,
indefinite and definite nominals in Italian. In contrast,
German-Italian bilinguals who grew up in Germany faced
considerable problems correcting bare subject NPs if these
were embedded in a generic context. They were slightly
better at correcting indefinite subject DPs and they faced
no problems correcting bare NPs in specific contexts.
That is, deviances between the stronger and the weaker
language were restricted to contexts in which Italian
differs from German.
Results of the AJT are compatible with previous
studies testing the acceptability of bare subject NPs in
generic contexts. Montrul and Ionin (2010) found that
Spanish heritage speakers corrected ungrammatical bare
plural NPs with generic reference in Spanish only 50%
of the time. The result is also in line with Serratrice
et al.'s (2009) study. Although these authors found that
all Italian-English bilingual children scored significantly
lower than monolingual controls, bilinguals in Italy
outperformed their bilingual counterparts in the UK and
showed significant progress with increasing age (ibid.,
p. 252). This suggests that they may become nativelike at a later point in their development, which in turn

752

Tanja Kupisch

Table 6. Correction of bare subject NPs in AJTs testing Romance languages.
Language (combination)

Participants

% of corrections for bare generic NPs

Serratrice et al. (2009)

Italian
Italian
Italian (with English) in Italy
Italian (with English) in the UK

Adult 1L1
Child 1L1 (age 6-10)
Child 2L1 (age 6-10)
Child 2L1 (age 6-10)

95-100%
95-100%
 50% (6;2-7;9)  70% (8;0-10;2)
below 20% (6;3-7;6)
below 20% (8;4-10;6)

Montrul & Ionin (2010)

Spanish
Spanish (with English) in the US

Adult 1L1
Adult heritage

99%
50%

This study

Italian as strong L1 (with German) Adult 2L1
Italian as weak L1 (with German) Adult 2L1

97%
33%

Table 7. Interpretation of definite subject DPs in TVJTs testing Romance languages.
Language (combination)

Participants

% of generic interpretations for DPs

Perez-Leroux et al. (2004)

Spanish
Spanish

Adult 1L1
Child 1L1

72%
60-70%

Montrul & Ionin (2010)

Spanish
Spanish (with English) in the US

Adult 1L1
Adult heritage

81.2%
56.7%

Adult 1L1
Child 1L1
Child 2L1

72%
71%
50%

Italian as strong L1 (with German) Adult 2L1
Italian as weak L1 (with German) Adult 2L1

61%
46%

Kupisch & Pierantozzi (2010) Italian
Italian
Italian (with German) in Germany
This study

is consistent with the outcomes of this study. Table 6
compares the results of all three studies.
The TVJT also yielded differences between Italian as
the stronger and as the weaker language. With definite
DPs - the condition in which Standard German does not
allow generic interpretations - participants with Italian as
the stronger language were more inclined to give a generic
interpretation than participants with Italian as the weaker
language. Although this difference was not statistically
significant between the two groups, there was a clear
tendency for bilingual subjects with a Romance language
as their weaker language to provide more specific
responses than monolingual speakers or bilinguals for
whom the Romance language is stronger, thus weakly
confirming results of previous studies (see Table 7).
Taken together, the results of this study suggest that
frequency of hearing and using Italian may play a
significant role in the development of grammar, here with
respect to article use in subject DPs. In fact, among 2L1ers
who grew up in Germany, only the participant who had
spent two years prior to testing in Italy showed ceiling
performance in the AJT (accuracy above 95%). These

results are consistent with previous hypotheses, e.g., by
Gathercole (2002) and Serratrice et al. (2009), which
stress the role of frequency of exposure and language
use in bilingual development.
This study shows further that in the language
which constitutes the majority language of a given
environment bilinguals will develop the same grammar
as monolinguals, suggesting that data from bilinguals'
stronger language may be as adequate as control data for
the weaker language as monolingual data.

6.2 Age of onset
This study shows that, in the TVJT (measuring preferred
readings of definite DPs) and in the AJT (measuring
the ability to correct indefinite DPs and bare NPs in
generic contexts), there were no statistically significant
differences between 2L1ers with Italian as their weaker
language and L2ers. This in turn implies that the age at
which participants had first been exposed to the language
cannot have determined their acquisition outcomes.

Generic subjects in Italian bilinguals
Instead, the time the two groups had spent in Italy and
the length of sustained exposure may have been crucial.
L2ers who succeeded in correcting 75% or more bare
subject NPs had on average lived seven consecutive years
in Italy, compared with the 2L1 weak Italian group having
on average lived in Italy for only two years. Moreover, the
L2ers were older than the 2L1ers and had been learning
Italian for 16 years on average, suggesting that some L2ers
may have heard and used Italian even more frequently than
the 2L1ers.
These results support the conclusion that, for the
phenomenon investigated, the impact of age of onset
can be overruled by frequent and sustained exposure,
regardless of whether exposure took place in childhood
or adulthood.
Incomplete grammars?
Recent studies in the domain of heritage language
development have proposed that incomplete acquisition
is a possible result of insufficient language input and use
in the heritage or weaker language (e.g., Montrul, 2008).
This study provides three reasons why the weaker 2L1
and L2 grammars should not be considered "incomplete".
First, participants did not reject definite nominals in
generic contexts but merely failed to correct bare NPs.
Second, they did not CONSISTENTLY interpret definite
nominals as specific (but merely did so PREDOMINANTLY).
Third, they often corrected indefinite articles in generic
contexts to definite ones, indicating that they did not fail
to acquire the generic feature of the definite article.
In this respect, these Italian grammars correspond
more closely with what Sorace (1993), in the context
of near-native L2ers, has referred to as DEVIANT
(rather than INCOMPLETE) grammars. Incomplete and
divergent grammars are two distinct states of grammatical
competence in ultimate attainment. The incomplete
grammar LACKS a particular L2 property, which
leads to random judgments. The divergent grammar
INCORPORATES an alternative representation of an L2
property, which leads to judgments that are consistently
different from those of native speakers. Given the rather
systematic behaviour of the Italian 2L1ers with German
as their stronger language and of the L2ers, the concept
of divergent grammars appears to be a more appropriate
descriptive term than that of incomplete grammars.
6.3 Models of cross-linguistic influence
It has been shown above that the stronger language of
an adult bilingual speaker exhibits the properties of the
monolingual target, while this does not hold for the weaker
language. Therefore, any standard model of CLI which
intends to fully capture such data should take language
dominance into account. In this study, the dominant
language corresponded with the environment language

753

during childhood and adolescence, indicating that the
quantity of input during childhood may be a factor that
determines acquisition outcomes.
The results also support the Semantic Overlap
Hypothesis, which predicts that an interpretation present
in both contact languages (here: the specific interpretation
of DPs) is overused in the language where two different
interpretations are available, at the cost of the option
available in only one of the two languages (here: the
generic interpretation of DPs). Since speakers with
German as the dominant language showed a strong
inclination to interpret DPs as specific in Italian
(compared to Italian-dominant speakers of Italian), the
predictions of the Semantic Overlap Hypothesis may
count as confirmed by this data.
In contrast, the Structural Overlap Hypothesis predicts
that Italian is not subject to influence. However, Germandominant participants (2L1ers and L2ers) overaccepted
bare Italian NPs in contexts where DPs are required, thus
contradicting this model.
At first glance, however, the results also seem to be
consistent with the Economy Hypothesis, according to
which learners opt for the syntactically less complex
option. Nevertheless, it can be argued that this is not
a plausible model for predicting CLI, at least not in
adult bilinguals. The first problem the model faces is
the existence of German varieties allowing both bare
nouns and definite articles with generic nouns (see
Section 2 above). If Avoid Structure were a universal
or exceptionless linguistic principle, then speakers of
a language should never entertain the possibility of
projecting DPs whenever projecting an NP IS an option
in that language. Second, although participants in this
study overaccepted bare NPs in generic contexts, they
also accepted DPs in the same type of context (instead
of correcting them to structurally less complex bare
NPs, as Avoid Structure predicts). Third, they corrected
semantically inappropriate indefinite DPs to definite
DPs, even though these DPs translate into bare NPs in
German.20 Taken together, these observations make it
rather difficult to interpret the data as evidence for a
general dislike of structurally more complex DPs.
To conclude, it appears reasonable to assume that
German-dominant speakers showed a preference for the
specific interpretation of DPs in Italian because this is
the only possible interpretation in Standard German and
Italian. In contrast, it appears improbable that Germandominant speakers accept more Italian bare NPs in generic
20

The fact that many participants corrected such indefinite DPs, while
failing to correct bare NPs, raises the possibility of a methodological
flaw. Since most other items in the AJT required word replacements or
word order changes, participants may have been insensitive to cases
requiring word insertions. Although plausible, this line of reasoning
is weakened by the behaviour of the Italian-dominant bilinguals, who
never failed to provide the proper correction.

754

Tanja Kupisch

contexts in order to avoid syntactically more complex
structures. An alternative explanation could be that
bilinguals try to create or accept syntactic constructions
that more transparently reflect the underlying semantic
and syntactic relations, as proposed by Andersen (1982,
p. 99): bilinguals might have overaccepted bare NPs when
the definite article was ambiguous in an attempt to create
a one-to-one mapping between syntax and semantics, as
they find it in German. If this were indeed the case, fewer
problems would be expected in a corresponding German
test, something to be explored in future research.
6.4 Methodological issues in the truth value
judgment task
This study attempted to avoid methodological problems
potentially arising in previous studies using truth value
judgment tasks. As mentioned above, one puzzling fact
is that Gelman and Raman's (2003) English-speaking
children were more successful than those studied by
Perez-Leroux et al. (2004) in using the presence of the
definite article as an indicator of specific reference, even
though they were younger. It was speculated that the
generic bias in the latter study might have been triggered
by particular properties of the introductory sentences. In
Serratrice et al.'s (2009) study, failure to interpret adverbs
("here or "in general") as clues for, respectively, specificity
or genericity, may account for some of the problems their
participants faced.
This study tried to avoid contextual influences, and
refrained from the use of introductory sentences or
adverbs that might bias the sentences' interpretation to
either a specific or a generic one. However, this move may
have created a new problem: The absence of context in
this study may have increased the subject's focus on the
picture, thereby inducing a specific bias. An indication
that this may have been the case is that some bare NPs
were interpreted as specific in the German version of
the test. Moreover, when looking at a series of pictures
with anomalous characters, a participant may think that
she has to interpret statements about genericity within
the world presented in the pictures. In other words, the
participants' judging of pictures from the point of view
of imaginary rather than real world knowledge may have
obscured the results. Although this may be a possible
flaw in the experimental setting, it does not invalidate the
measured difference in preferred answers between Italiandominant bilinguals and German-dominant bilinguals.
Nevertheless, future studies should address this issue.
7. Conclusions
This study focussed on the use and interpretation of
generic nominals in learners of Italian. Three groups were
tested: (i) simultaneous German-Italian bilinguals who

grew up in Germany and had Italian as their weaker
language, (ii) simultaneous German-Italian bilinguals
who grew up in Italy and had Italian as their stronger
language (and German as their weaker language), and
(iii) advanced L2ers of Italian with German as their L1.
Both groups of German-dominant speakers (i.e., 2L1ers
with weak Italian and L2ers) differed from bilinguals with
Italian as the stronger language in judging and interpreting
nominals in generic contexts: they faced significantly
more problems in rejecting bare NPs in generic contexts,
and overaccepted sentences like Italian  Donne guidano
meglio (literally: "Women drive better"). Additionally,
they were more likely to interpret definite-marked DPs
(ambiguous in terms of specific and generic readings) as
specific, as in sentences such as Italian I canguri hanno
la coda (literally: "The kangaroos have the tail"). Since
German and Italian differ in these two conditions, the
results can be taken as evidence in favour of CLI from
German. In fact, none of the three groups experienced
difficulties in test conditions for which German and Italian
have overlapping structures and interpretations, as is the
case for DPs with specific reference.
While showing CLI, 2L1ers with Italian as their
weaker language and L2ers never corrected DPs into bare
NPs, and they were not generally insensitive to semantic
violations in generic contexts. This speaks against the
view that they failed to acquire the generic feature of
definite articles. Instead, they consistently and rather
uniformly tolerated bare NPs in contexts where Standard
German requires them (see also Barton (2011) for similar
results with German-French bilinguals), suggesting that
their grammars may count as "deviant" from the
grammars of speakers who grew up in Italy, rather than
"incomplete".
Since Italian-dominant bilinguals provide the same
judgments as one would expect from monolingual
speakers, one may conclude that bilingualism does not
automatically lead to deviant grammars. Rather, deviance
may be a result of reduced input and language use during
childhood.
The fact that some L2ers perform native-like and
on a par with bilinguals whose stronger language is
Italian indicates that L1-influence can be overcome at
very advanced stages of development. Quantitative and
qualitative similarities between Italian as an L2 and as
the weaker language in bilinguals imply that frequent
exposure and consistent input are more crucial than age
of onset, at least for the phenomenon investigated.

References
Andersen, R. W. (1982). Determining the linguistic attributes of
language attrition. In R. D. Lambert & B. F. Freed (eds.),
The loss of language skills, pp. 83-118. Amsterdam: John
Benjamins.

Generic subjects in Italian bilinguals
Barton, D. (2011). Cross-linguistic influence in adult early
bilinguals: Generic noun phrases in German and French.
Arbeiten zur Mehrsprachigkeit, 96.
Bley-Vroman, R. (1990). The logical problem of foreign
language learning. Linguistic Analysis, 20, 3-49.
Chierchia, G. (1998). Reference to kinds across languages.
Natural Language Semantics, 6 (4), 339-405.
Dayal, V. (2004). Number marking and (in)definiteness in kind
terms. Linguistics and Philosophy, 27, 393-450.
Dopke, S. (1998). Competing language structures: The
acquisition of verb placement by bilingual German-English
children. Journal of Child Language, 25, 555-584.
Gathercole, V. Mueller. (2002). Grammatical gender in bilingual
and monolingual children: A Spanish morphosyntactic
distinction. In D. K. Oller & R. E. Eilers (eds.), Language
and literacy in bilingual children, pp. 207-209. Clevedon:
Multilingual Matters.
Gavarro, A., Perez-Leroux, A., & Roeper, T. (2006). Definite
and bare noun contrasts in child Catalan. In V. Torrens &
L. Escobar (eds.), The acquisition of syntax in Romance
languages, pp. 51-68. Amsterdam & Philadelphia, PA:
John Benjamins.
Gelman, S., & Raman, L. (2003). Preschool children use
linguistic form class and pragmatic cues to interpret
generics. Child Development, 74 (1), 308-325.
Grosjean, F. (1989). Neurolinguists, beware! The bilingual is not
two monolinguals in one person. Brain and Language, 36
(1), 3-15.
Hulk, A., & Muller, N. (2000). Cross-linguistic influence at
the interface between syntax and pragmatics. Bilingualism:
Language and Cognition, 3 (3), 227-244.
Ionin, T., & Montrul, S. (2010). The role of L1-transfer in the
interpretation of articles with definite plurals in L2-English.
Language Learning, 60, 877-925.
Krifka, M., Pelletier, F., Carlson, G., ter Meulen, A, Chierchia,
G., & Link, G. (1995). Genericity: An introduction. In G.
Carlson & F. Pelletier (eds.), The generic book, pp. 1-124.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Kupisch, T., & Pierantozzi, C. (2010). Interpreting definite
plural subjects: A comparison of German and Italian
monolingual and bilingual children. In K. Franich, K.
Iserman & L. Keil (eds.), Proceedings of the 34th Annual
Boston University Conference on Language Development,
pp. 245-254. Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.
Lenneberg, E. (1967). Biological foundations of language. New
York: Wiley.
Longobardi, G. (1994). Reference and proper names: A theory of
N-movement in syntax and logical form. Linguistic Inquiry,
25 (4), 609-665.
Meisel, J. M. (2007). The weaker language in early child
bilingualism: Acquiring a first language like a second
language? Applied Psycholinguistics, 28 (3), 495-514.
Meisel, J. M. (2011). First and second language acquisition:
Parallels and differences. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Meisel, J. M., Bonnesen, M., & Elsig, M. (2011). Delayed
grammatical acquisition in first language development:
Subject-verb inversion and subject clitics in French
interrogatives. Linguistic Approaches to Bilingualism,
1 (4), 347-390.

755

Montrul, S. (2008). Incomplete acquisition on bilingualism: Re-examining the age-factor. Amsterdam: John
Benjamins.
Montrul, S., & Ionin, T. (2010). Transfer effects in the
interpretation of definite articles by Spanish heritage
speakers. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 13 (4),
449-473.
Muller, N. (1998). Transfer in bilingual first language
acquisition. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 1,
151-171.
Oosterhof, A. (2004). Generic noun phrases in Dutch. In F.
Karlsson (ed.), Proceedings of the 20th Scandinavian
Conference of Linguistics, pp. 1-22. Helsinki: University
of Helsinki, Department of General Linguistics.
Perez-Leroux, A., Munn, A., Schmitt, C., & DeIrish, M. (2004).
Learning definite determiners: Genericity and definiteness
in English and Spanish. In A. Brugos, L. Micciulla & C. E.
Smith (eds.), Proceedings Supplement of the 28th BUCLD,
http://www.bu.edu/bucld/proceedings/supplement/vol28/
(retrieved December 6, 2011).
Platzack, C. (2001). The vulnerable C-domain. Brain and
Language, 77, 364-377.
Polinsky, M. (1997). American Russian: Language loss meets
language acquisition. In E. Wayles Browne, N. Dornisch, N.
Kondrashowva & D. Ze (eds.), Annual Workshop on Formal
Approaches to Slavic Linguistics: The Cornell Meeting
(1995), pp. 370-406. Ann Arbor, MI: Michigan Slavic
Publishers.
Renzi, L. (1982). Il vero plurale dell'articolo `uno'. Lingua
Nostra, 42, 63-68.
Rothman, J. (2009). Understanding the nature of early
bilingualism: Romance languages as heritage languages.
International Journal of Bilingualism, 13 (2), 155-163.
Serratrice, L., Sorace, A., Filiaci, F., & Baldo, M. (2009).
Bilingual children's sensitivity to specificity and genericity:
Evidence from metalinguistic awareness. Bilingualism:
Language and Cognition, 12 (2), 239-257.
Slabakova, R. (2006). Learnability in the second language
acquisition of semantics: A bidirectional study of a
semantic parameter. Second Language Research, 22, 498-
523.
Snape, N., Garcia Mayo, M. del P., & Gurel, A. (2009). Spanish,
Turkish, Japanese and Chinese L2 learners' acquisition of
generic reference. In M. Bowles, T. Ionin, S. Montrul &
A. Tremblay (eds.), Proceedings of the 10th Generative
Approaches to Second Language Acquisition Conference,
pp. 1-8. Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.
Sorace, A. (1993). Incomplete vs. divergent representations
of unaccusativity. Second Language Research, 9 (1), 22-
47.
Sorace, A. (2011). Pinning down the concept of "interface" in
bilingualism. Linguistic Approaches to Bilingualism, 1 (1),
1-33.
Sorace, A., & Filiaci, F. (2006). Anaphora resolution in nearnative speakers of Italian. Second Language Research, 22,
339-368.
Sorace, A., & Serratrice, L. (2009). Internal and external
interfaces in bilingual language development: Beyond
structural overlap. International Journal of Bilingualism,
13 (2), 1-16.

756

Tanja Kupisch

ter Meulen, A. (1995). Semantic constraints on type-shifting
anaphora. In G. Carlson & F. J. Pelletier (eds.), The
generic book, pp. 339-357. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Tremblay, A. (2011). Proficiency assessment in second language
acquisition research: Clozing the gap. Studies in Second
Language Acquisition, 33, 339-372.

White, L. (1989). Universal grammar and second language
acquisition. Amsterdam & Philadelphia, PA: John
Benjamins.
White, L. (2009). Grammatical theory: Interfaces and L2
knowledge. In W. B. Ritchie & T. K. Bhatia (eds.), The
new handbook of second language acquisition, pp. 49-68.
Bingley: Emerald.

