Journal of Memory and Language 67 (2012) 45-58

Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect

Journal of Memory and Language
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jml

Retrieval effort improves memory and metamemory in the face
of misinformation q
John B. Bulevich , Ayanna K. Thomas
Department of Psychology,The Richard Stockton College of New Jersey, Galloway, NJ 08205, United States
Department of Psychology,Tufts University, Medford, MA, United States

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 3 September 2011
revision received 18 December 2011
Available online 21 January 2012
Keywords:
Misinformation
Metamemory
Confidence
Aging
Eyewitness memory
Retrieval effort

a b s t r a c t
Retrieval demand, as implemented through test format and retrieval instructions, was varied across two misinformation experiments. Our goal was to examine whether increasing
retrieval demand would improve the relationship between confidence and memory performance, and thereby reduce misinformation susceptibility. We hypothesized that improving the relationship between confidence and memory performance would improve
controlled processes at retrieval. That is, when confidence and memory performance were
well calibrated, participants would be able to withhold incorrect responses if given the
opportunity. To examine the relationship between memory retention, confidence, and controlled withholding, we compared older and younger adults' performance on a forced
memory test, where participants could not withhold responses, and on a free test, where
participants were encouraged to withhold responses. Confidence judgments were collected
after forced responding. Retrieval demand was manipulated indirectly through type of test
(cued recall vs. recognition) and directly through retrieval instructions. The results demonstrated that increasing retrieval demands improved memory retention, metamemorial
monitoring and effective withholding. This was particularly pronounced when participants
received misleading information. Finally, older adults required explicit direction to effectively monitor memory and institute successful controlled withholding.
O 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Introduction
Consider the possibility of witnessing a crime. You are
most likely motivated to report what you have witnessed
correctly. However, when interviewed by detectives, you
find that in their attempts to ascertain a complete account
of the event, they encourage you to guess and persuade you
to answer questions even when you are unsure. While
questioning, these detectives may also unwittingly introduce information that may bias or distort your recollection.
Even the most earnest witness will find it difficult to
q
Portions of this research represents a dissertation for a Doctor of
Philosophy degree at Washington University in St. Louis for the first
author.
 Corresponding author. Address: The Richard Stockton College of New
Jersey, Department of Psychology, 101 Vera King Farris Drive, Galloway,
NJ 08205, United States.
E-mail address: john.bulevich@stockton.edu (J.B. Bulevich).

0749-596X/$ - see front matter O 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jml.2011.12.012

achieve accuracy when faced with pressures to provide details, when encouraged to guess, when presented with
post-event information, and when discouraged to say ``I
don't know''. The present study examined changes in younger and older adult eyewitness memory accuracy within
the misinformation paradigm under conditions where people were forced to respond to every question and under
conditions where people were encouraged to exercise control and withhold answers for which they may not be certain. We examined performance under forced-reporting
instructions to ascertain memory retention of a witnessed
event after the presentation of misleading post-event information. We examined performance under free-reporting
instructions to determine whether the effect of misleading
post-event information could be counteracted, thereby
improving memory accuracy. Finally, we manipulated
retrieval demands in order to improve memory retention
and accuracy.

46

J.B. Bulevich, A.K. Thomas / Journal of Memory and Language 67 (2012) 45-58

Retention, monitoring, and control
In their classic study, Loftus, Miller, and Burns (1978)
demonstrated that exposure to misleading information
after witnessing an event reduced accuracy on a later memory test. Variants of this general finding have since been
demonstrated in dozens of papers. Further, older adults
have been shown to be more susceptible to misinformation
than younger adults (Cohen & Faulkner, 1989; Coxon &
Valentine, 1997; Holliday et al., 2011; Karpel, Hoyer, &
Toglia, 2001; Mitchell, Johnson, & Mather, 2003). A primary
goal of the present research is to examine processes that
underlie age-related increases in misinformation susceptibility, in order to develop techniques to improve overall
memory performance. The Quantity-Accuracy Profile
(QAP) methodology, developed by Koriat and Goldsmith
(1996), allows us to examine the contributions of memory
retention disruption, monitoring and/or control deficits, to
misinformation susceptibility. Specifically, this model
incorporates metacognitive processes into the assessment
of memory performance. Retention is measured by the
forced-reporting memory test and is the proportion of
forced report answers that are correct. Metacognitive monitoring is also measured during forced-reporting through
the collection of confidence judgments for each answer.
Memory monitoring effectiveness can be captured by monitoring resolution, which allows for an evaluation of
whether participants can distinguish correct from incorrect
responses. Control is measured during the free-reporting
test, which follows forced-report. During this testing phase
participants are re-presented with responses given during
the forced report phase. Participants are encouraged to
exercise control and withhold answers that may be associated with low confidence. By comparing performance during the forced and free reporting stages we can assess both
control sensitivity and response criterion. That is, we can
determine whether participants volunteered answers that
accompany high confidence and determine the confidence
point at which answers were volunteered. The former allows for the examination of the effect of monitoring on control. Koriat and Goldsmith's model makes the assumption
that monitoring will affect control (see also, Nelson &
Narens, 1990) and that individuals will withhold answers
associated with low confidence (Goldsmith & Koriat, 2008).
Research suggests that misinformation susceptibility
may, in part, be the result of damage or occlusion to the
memorial information. For example, the memory impairment hypothesis (Loftus, 1979) states that the memory
trace for the original information is permanently altered
or destroyed by the misleading post event information.
Similarly, the blocking hypothesis (Eakin, Schreiber, &
Sergent-Marshall, 2003), suggests that the original information is ``blocked'' from access by the misleading information. Measures of retention would directly examine these
memory-based explanations for misinformation susceptibility, as broadly, they suggest that the original information
is not accessible at the time of test.
Alternative to retention explanations, misinformation
susceptibility may be a result of erroneous subjective experience that resulted in faulty decisions at retrieval. As one
example, in order for participants to effectively withhold

answers, they must be able to successfully inspect and
monitor both the quality of evidence for a candidate
response and the bases for responding when recollection
fails. Regarding the first point, when specific details are
recollected, individuals often will determine that the episode was actually experienced. However, when conscious
recollection fails, individuals may use alternatives to recollection such as plausibility, familiarity, or accessibility
(Jacoby & Hollingshead, 1990; Reder, Wible, & Martin,
1986; Thomas, Bulevich, & Chan, 2010). These alternatives,
recruited under forced-responding test conditions, may be
less valid than detailed recollection and may lead to memory inaccuracies. In the case of the misinformation effect,
participants may respond with the misleading post-event
information because that information is easily accessed
(i.e., Thomas et al., 2010). When given the opportunity to
withhold during free-responding, those answers may be
omitted. That is, when given the opportunity to use monitoring and control processes, people may assess the effectiveness of retrieval strategies, and if allowed, may
withhold items that were accessed with retrieval strategies
judged to be less effective or reliable. By using the QAP
methodology, and comparing older to younger adults, we
examined the specific cognitive mechanisms that underlie
increased age-related susceptibility to misinformation
(i.e., Mitchell, Johnson, & Mather, 2003). Further, we developed age-appropriate techniques to counteract the
negative influence of misleading post-event information.
Age-related monitoring deficits
Across the varied metacognitive monitoring tasks, older
adults have sometimes shown age-related impairments
and, in other instances, age-equivalent performance. For
example, older adults have been shown to be less accurate
than younger adults when making episodic FOK predictions
(Perrotin, Isingrini, Souchay, Clarys, & Taconnat, 2006;
Souchay, Isingrini, & Espagnet, 2000; Thomas, Bulevich, &
Dubois, 2011); however age equivalence has been demonstrated on semantic FOK tasks (Allen-Burge & Storandt,
2000; Butterfield, Nelson, & Peck, 1988; Backman &
Karlsson, 1985; Lachman, Lachman, & Thronesbery, 1979;
Marquie & Huet, 2000). Research suggests that the inconsistency of age-related impairment in monitoring tasks might
be due to the specific requirements of the task, with episodic FOK judgment accuracy being more dependent on access to contextual episodic information (Souchay, Moulin,
Clarys, Taconnat, & Isingrini, 2007; Thomas et al., 2011).
In the present study, we were interested in the monitoring of the validity of candidate memory responses as
expressed by the relationship between confidence judgments and correctness (Lovelace & Marsh, 1985; Perfect &
Stollery, 1993), within the misinformation paradigm. Previous research has demonstrated that older adults show a
pattern of overconfidence when exposed to misleading
post-event information (Cohen & Faulkner, 1989; Dodson,
Bawa, & Krueger, 2007; Dodson & Krueger, 2006; Jacoby,
Bishara, Hessels, & Toth, 2005; Karpel et al., 2001; Mitchell
et al., 2003). This pattern of overconfidence may be a result
of an accessibility bias. That is, information that is easily
accessed, or retrieved more fluently, may result in higher

J.B. Bulevich, A.K. Thomas / Journal of Memory and Language 67 (2012) 45-58

confidence ratings than information that is less accessible.
In situations where misleading information is more accessible, confidence in that retrieved information may be
inappropriately high. Further, Kelley and Sahakyan (2003)
found that the monitoring deficit demonstrated by older
adults resulted in ineffective withholding. In this task, older
and younger participants were presented with words pairs
that were either weakly related (dog-rock) or weakly
related and deceptive (nurse-dollar). These pairs were
described as deceptive because the authors tested participants' memories with the cue nurse-d____r. In this situation, the pre-potent response to the cue is doctor rather
than dollar. The pattern of age-related changes in both
monitoring and control were intensified for deceptive word
pairs (see Rhodes & Kelley, 2005 for similar results). Finally,
Pansky, Goldsmith, Koriat, and Pearlman-Avnion (2009)
also demonstrated age-related monitoring and control deficits in older adults after the presentation of a narrative
slide show. In the present study, we attempt to synthesize
these different components by examining whether misleading post-event information negatively impacted these
age effects in monitoring and control and whether the age
deficit could be reduced.
Younger adults have also demonstrated overconfidence
in the misinformation paradigm (Weingardt, Leonesio, &
Loftus, 1994). Similarly, when young adult participants
were asked to make remember/know (R/K) judgments on
the criterial test after exposure to misleading post-event
information, participants gave ``remember'' responses to
items incorrectly retrieved from the narrative and attributed them to the original event (Roediger, Jacoby, &
McDermott, 1996). While there is an ongoing debate as
to how to interpret remember/know judgments, there is
substantial support for the view that these judgments are
at least partially supported by confidence, (Wixted &
Stretch, 2004; Yonelinas, 2001; but see Karayianni &
Gardiner, 2003 for an alternate viewpoint). Taken together,
these results suggest that misleading post-event information negatively impacts the relationship between confidence and memory performance, and over-confidence is
greater in older adults as compared to younger adults.
Improving monitoring and control after misinformation
A second goal of the present research was to examine
techniques that could be used to improve metacognitive
processes of monitoring and control. Using the QAP methodology, we directly assessed whether techniques designed
to enhance performance affected retention, monitoring,
and/or control. We tested whether increasing retrieval demands would improve the relationship between memory
performance and confidence, thereby improving accuracy
on the final free-report test. The influence of retrieval demands on these processes was examined in two ways: (1)
comparing cued recall to recognition; (2) providing instructions to participants designed to facilitate the retrieval of
additional contextual information before answering questions on the forced-reporting test.
Researchers generally agree that retrieval demands
differ between recognition and recall tests of memory,
with recall placing larger retrieval demands on the partic-

47

ipant (Roediger & Guynn, 1996). Whether recall tests are
conceptualized as requiring more retrieval effort or increased controlled processing, it is clear that participants
engage in different and, most likely, more taxing processes
than those engaged when recognition tests are given. In
support of our retrieval demand hypothesis, Robinson,
Johnson, and Robertson (2000) found that the relationship
between confidence and memory performance was better
when participants were given a cued recall as compared
to a recognition test (see also Robinson & Johnson, 1996,
for a similar result). To extend this finding, we examined
whether retrieval demand would affect this relationship
after exposure to misleading post-event information. Research has also demonstrated that retrieval of contextual
information prior to making metacognitive judgments led
participants to be more accurate in their predictions (Thomas, Bulevich, & Dubois, 2011). Further, when older and
younger participants were instructed to evaluate contextual information before making source monitoring decisions, they improved the accuracy of those decisions
(Thomas & Bulevich, 2006). The present experiments
examined the role retrieval demands play in reducing general susceptibility to and age-related differences in the
misinformation effect.
The present experiments
The present study examined the contributions of retention, monitoring, and control to misinformation susceptibility in younger and older adults. Both experiments
followed the same general methodology. First, participants
viewed a 40 min video. Following the video, they read a
narrative that included both correct and incorrect information. After a brief delay, participants engaged in their first
memory test. They were told to base their answers on what
occurred in the video. In the first test, participants were
forced to produce or select an answer for each question
whether or not they felt that they actually knew the answer. They also assigned each answer a confidence judgment. In the second phase of testing, participants
received a copy of the test they completed with the confidence ratings removed. They were told, in this phase, to select only the answers that they actually believed to be
correct (i.e., actually occurred in the video).
Retention was measured during the forced reporting
test phase. We predicted that memory accuracy would be
lower on misleading trials as compared to control trials
in both older and younger adults; however, we expected
a greater misinformation effect in older than younger
adults. Monitoring was also measured during the forced
reporting phase, by comparing confidence judgments with
memory performance. We predicted that older adults
would demonstrate impaired monitoring when compared
to younger adults on misleading trials; however, the age
differences would be mediated by increasing retrieval demands through type of test and type of instructions. This
prediction follows from findings where older adults' feeling of knowing accuracy improved after requiring the retrieval of contextual information related to the target
(Thomas, Bulevich, & Dubois, 2011) as well as results that
showed that diagnostic instructions improved older adults'

48

J.B. Bulevich, A.K. Thomas / Journal of Memory and Language 67 (2012) 45-58

memory performance in a source monitoring task (Thomas
& Bulevich, 2006). The age discrepancy in monitoring
would result in control deficits, with older adults being less
likely to withhold incorrect answers as compared to younger adults.
Experiment 1
Method
Participants
The participants were 48 younger and 48 older adults.
The participants were tested in groups of either older or
younger participants and received either course credit or
financial compensation ($10 per hour). The younger adults
were Washington University undergraduates and the older
adults were recruited from the Washington University and
Colby College Older Adult participant pools. The demographic
information for the participants for both experiments is displayed in Table 1. Older adults were prescreened, and only
those who presented as cognitively healthy, were not on
medications known to affect cognitive functioning, and
who had normal or corrected-to-normal hearing and vision
were tested. The older adults did not differ on level of education or vocabulary score (Salthouse, 1993) from the
younger adults.
Design
The experimental design was a 2  2  2 mixed design.
The variables were Age (Older or Younger adults), Type of
Test (Cued Recall or Recognition) and Trial Type (Control or
Misleading). Age and Type of Test were between subjects
variables.
Materials
The materials consisted of a 42 min video clip. The video was the first episode of the first season of 24 (20th
Century Fox Television, 2001). The video details the events
of a government agent attempting to stop a political assassination. Twenty-four critical items were selected from the
video as items for the memory test.
To select the 24 critical items, the materials were pilot
tested. Fifteen younger adults and fifteen older adults were
shown the video clip. They were then given a cued recall
test with 52 items. These items were selected to correspond to pieces of information in the video that were
clearly visible or audible as well as easily verifiable. The

Table 1
Demographic information for both experiments (means and standard
deviation).
Years of education

Vocabulary score

Experiment 1
Younger
20.1 (1.5)
Older
74.2 (4.1)

Age

14.1 (0.9)
15.2 (3.1)

14.2 (1.8)
14.8 (4.2)

Experiment 2
Younger
19.5 (0.7)
Older
73.2 (3.6)

13.7 (1.4)
14.6 (5.6)

14.2 (2.2)
14.5 (2.7)

tests were scored and items were eliminated if over 90%
of the respondents answered correctly or less than 10% answered correctly from either group. After these eliminations, 24 items remained which served as the critical items.
For the misinformation segment of the experiment, a
written narrative was generated from the video. Twentyfour critical items were divided into two groups; 12 items
served as control items and were not included in the narrative at all and 12 items provided misleading information
based on what occurred in the video. The misleading information in the narrative contradicted details from the video
(i.e., person's car described as a different color). Item type
was counterbalanced across participants.
Procedure
Participants were tested in groups of four to ten. In the
first phase of the experiment, participants were instructed
to watch the video carefully and to pay attention to details
because their memories were going to be tested later. Participants watched the video projected on a Sony LCD projector from an approximate distance of twelve to
eighteen feet. The image measured 112 inches on the diagonal. None of the participants had previously seen the video.1 After the video concluded, participants were given a
copy of the narrative, which was approximately 1100 words.
They were told that it was a written narrative of the video
they had watched and were given 10 min to read it. Participants were not given any additional information regarding
the author or accuracy of the narrative. After 10 min, the
narratives were collected and participants completed a short
demographics form, a synonym vocabulary test (Salthouse,
1993), and a payment voucher, if necessary. These forms
took approximately 15 min to complete.
Afterwards, participants began the first phase of testing.
Thirty younger and 30 older adults received a four alternative recognition test, and 18 younger and 18 older adults
received a cued recall test. A set of participants had to be
excluded from analysis for the cued recall test group due
to experimenter error. Participants were told to base all answers on what they remembered from the video and to
disregard the narrative. Testing was divided into two
phases, a forced-responding phase and a free responding
phase. During the forced responding phase, participants
were required to answer every question. Specifically, for
the recognition test, participants were instructed that they
must select an answer for every question and not to leave
any blank even if they must guess. For the cued recall test,
participants were instructed to produce an answer for
every question. Participants were also instructed to provide a confidence rating for every answer on a scale of
25% to 100% with 25% representing chance performance
for the recognition test. They were instructed to provide
a confidence rating for every answer for the cued recall test
on a scale of 0-100%. The questions were presented in the
1
None of the participants had seen the particular episode of the program
used in the experiment. However, based on pilot testing, previous viewing
of the episode did not significantly affect participants' responses. In
addition, participants from both age groups reported being engaged during
the presentation of the episode based on a post-experimental
questionnaire.

49

J.B. Bulevich, A.K. Thomas / Journal of Memory and Language 67 (2012) 45-58

order that they occurred in the video and the participants
were told to take as long as needed for the test. The mean
time to complete the test was 17 min.
Once completed, the tests were collected and the experimenter removed the confidence ratings from the test. The
free-responding testing phase then began. Specifically, participants were presented with the answers they provided
during forced-responding and were instructed to circle
only the items that they actually believed to be correct.
Confidence ratings were removed so that participants
would not arbitrarily pick a number (i.e., 75%) and select
all answers given that rating or higher. After they completed this stage of testing, the participants were debriefed
and dismissed.
Results
The primary goal of this experiment was to examine
memory retention, monitoring of retention, and the relationship between monitoring and control within the misinformation paradigm. To measure retention, we
examined performance associated with forced-responding.
Monitoring of retention was measured by examining
resolution through Somers' D correlations.2 The Somers' D
correlation (Pannu & Kaszniak, 2005) is a measure of association between two variables that ranges from 1 to +1.
Values close to an absolute value of 1 indicate a strong relationship between the two variables and values close to 0
indicate little or no relationship between the variables.
Somers' D is an asymmetric extension of gamma that differs
only in the inclusion of number of pairs not tied on the independent variable. To examine the relationship between
monitoring and control we focused on gains in accuracy
between forced and free responding as well as control sensitivity. To preview our findings, older adults demonstrated a
greater misinformation effect, as measured by the difference
between performance on control and misleading trials on
the forced-responding test, than younger adults. The misinformation effect was smaller on the cued recall test as compared to the recognition test. Monitoring of retention, as
measured by Somers' D correlations, was better on the cued
recall test as compared to recognition. Control was impaired
on misleading trials as compared to control trials; however
it was better when participants were given a cued recall test
as compared to a recognition test. Finally, participants were
able to use monitoring and control processes to improve
their accuracy between forced and free responding.

retention. As displayed in Table 2, we found evidence for
the misinformation effect in both older and younger adults.
Further, older adults were more susceptible to misleading
post-event information than younger adults. To confirm
this pattern, we performed a 2 (Trial Type: Control,
Misleading)  2 (Group: Younger, Older)  2 (Test: Cued
Recall, Recognition) mixed ANOVA and found main effects
for Trial Type, F(1, 92) = 63.96, p < .01, Group, F(1, 92) =
72.53, p < .01, and Test, F(1, 92) = 27.49, p < .01. Performance was worse on misleading trials (M = .44) as compared to control trials (M = .61), demonstrating the
misinformation effect. Younger adults (M = .64) demonstrated greater overall retention than older adults
(M = .42). In addition, retention was greater when participants were given a recognition test (M = .60) as compared
to a cued recall test (M = .46). Finally, the interaction
between Test and Trial Type was significant, F(1, 92) =
10.77, p < .01. The discrepancy in retention between control
trials and misleading trials was greater when participants

Table 2
Measures of memory and monitoring broken down by age and type of test
for Experiment 1.
Control

Misleading

M

SD

M

SD

.63
.63
.65

(.12)
(.12)
(.37)

.55
.55
.64

(.21)
(.21)
(.35)

Free report
Quantity
Accuracy
Prc

.48
.81
.86

(.20)
(.22)
(.15)

.49
.86
.81

(.21)
(.17)
(.18)

Recognition
Forced report
Quantity
Accuracy
Monitoring

.79
.79
.54

(.12)
(.12)
(.35)

.58
.58
.25

(.15)
(.15)
(.31)

Free report
Quantity
Accuracy
Prc

.58
.96
.88

(.17)
(.07)
(.14)

.50
.80
.90

(.19)
(.24)
(.10)

.39
.39
.64

(.17)
(.17)
(.29)

.26
.26
.46

(.14)
(.14)
(.39)

Younger
Cued recall
Forced report
Quantity
Accuracy
Monitoring

Older
Cued recall
Forced report
Quantity
Accuracy
Monitoring

Retention and monitoring of retention
By examining the proportion of forced-responding
answers that were correct, we were able to assess overall

Free Report
Quantity
Accuracy
Prc

.28
.63
.84

(.13)
(.27)
(.23)

.21
.51
.76

(.13)
(.14)
(.25)

2
We chose to include resolution (the item by item relationship between
confidence and memory performance) as our measure of monitoring
effectiveness. Calibration (the aggregate relationship between confidence
and memory performance) was a less interesting and informative measure
of monitoring effectiveness in the context of our experiments. When
calibration served as the dependent measure, the effects that we found
(overconfidence for misleading items and increased overconfidence for
older adults) replicated previous research (Dodson & Krueger, 2006;
Weingardt, Toland, & Loftus, 1994) and only served to make the exposition
of the results more difficult.

Recognition
Forced report
Quantity
Accuracy
Monitoring

.63
.63
.56

(.16)
(.16)
(.31)

.39
.39
.09

(.20)
(.20)
(.44)

Free report
Quantity
Accuracy
Prc

.46
.79
.84

(.17)
(.18)
(.18)

.31
.45
.79

(.18)
(.27)
(.18)

50

J.B. Bulevich, A.K. Thomas / Journal of Memory and Language 67 (2012) 45-58

were given a recognition test as compared to a cued recall
test. That is, the misinformation effect was greater when
participants took a recognition test as compared to a cued
recall test. No other effects were significant, F's < 1.
Resolution, using the Somers' D correlations, was computed to examine monitoring accuracy. A 2 (Trial Type:
Control, Misleading)  2 (Group: Younger, Older)  2
(Test: Cued Recall, Recognition) ANOVA on Somers' D correlations found a main effect for Group, F(1, 89) = 19.03,
p < .001, and a main effect of Trial Type, F(1, 89) = 19.41,
p < .001. Younger adults demonstrated better resolution
(M = .59) than older adults (M = .36). Resolution was also
better on control trials (M = .59) as compared to misleading
trials (M = .36). In addition, the interaction between Group
and Trial Type was significant, F(1, 89) = 7.73, p < .05. The
resolution difference between older and younger adults
was greater on misleading trials as compared to control trials, with older adults demonstrating extremely poor resolution on misleading trials. Finally, the interaction
between Trial Type and Test was marginally significant,
F(1, 89) = 2.70, p = .09. The resolution difference between
control and misleading trials was greater when participants were given a recognition test as compared to a cued
recall test, with recognition resulting in extremely poor
resolution on misleading trials (M = .17). No other effects
were significant, Fs < 1.
How monitoring affects control: gains and losses
We examined whether older and younger adults could
use metacognitive processes to improve their accuracy between forced and free responding. Accuracy on the forced
responding test was identical to our retention measure,
and was computed as the proportion of correct answers
out of the total number of questions. Accuracy on the free
responding test was the proportion of correct answers out
of the total number of answers provided (Kelley &
Sahakyan, 2003; Koriat & Goldsmith, 1996). To begin with
we conducted a 2 (Responding: Forced, Free)  2 (Test:
Cued Recall, Recognition)  2 (Trial Type: Control, Misleading)  2 (Group: Older, Younger) ANOVA to examine gains
in accuracy between forced and free responding. Gains
were demonstrated through a main effect found for
Responding, F(1, 92) = 259.07, p < .001. That is, performance
was improved when participants were given the option to
withhold responses (M = .72) as compared to when forced
to respond (M = .53). Responding significantly interacted
with Test, F(1, 92) = 16.00, p < .001. The gains in performance were greater when participants were given a cued
recall test as compared to a recognition test. Further, as
with the measure for retention, we found main effects for
Group, F(1, 92) = 80.54, p < .001, and Test, F(1, 92) = 11.82,
p < .001. Performance scores were higher for younger
adults as compared to older adults. In addition, performance scores were higher when participants were given a
recognition test as compared to a cued recall test. With regard to Trial Type, consistent with the retention measure,
performance scores were significantly higher for control
trials as compared to misleading trials, F(1, 92)=45.09,
p < .001. Further, as with our measure of retention, Trial
Type interacted with Group, F(1, 92) = 6.11, p < .05 and Test,
F(1, 92) = 14.26, p < .001.

More important to the present set of analyses, we found
that the interaction among Responding, Group, and Test,
was marginally significant, F(1, 92) = 2.84, p < .1. Both
younger and older adults made greater gains in accuracy
when given a cued recall test as compared to a recognition
test; however the difference between forced report scoring
and free report scoring was greater for older adults than
younger adults. That is, older adults benefitted more from
the cued recall test than younger adults. Further, the interaction among Responding, Trial Type, and Group,
F(1, 92) = 7.16, p < .01 was significant. As can be seen in
Table 2, whereas younger adults made gains for both control and misleading trials, older adults made greater gains
on control trials as compared to misleading trials. Finally,
the interaction among Responding, Trial Type, and Test
was marginally significant, F(1, 92) = 2.79, p < .1. The greatest gains were made on misleading trials when participants were given a cued recall test. No other effects were
significant, F's < 1.
If participants cannot perfectly distinguish which of
their candidate responses in forced report are correct and
which are incorrect, then increases in accuracy in free report may come at the expense of quantity correct. We were
primarily interested in how much correct information was
lost between forced and free responding, and whether that
loss differed as a function of Trial Type. We performed a 2
(Responding: Forced, Free)  2 (Test: Cued Recall Recognition)  2 (Trial Type: Control, Misleading)  2 (Group:
Younger, Older) ANOVA on quantity averages under forced
and free responding constraints. Quantity was determined
by computing the proportion correct out of the total number of questions. Thus even under free responding constraints, where participants were given the option to
withhold responses, the total number of questions still
determined the average scores.
Under these scoring parameters we did find that participants lost correct information when given the opportunity
to withhold. This was demonstrated by the main effect
found for Responding, F(1, 92) = 108.92, p < .001. Performance scores were higher under forced responding constraints (M = .59) as compared to free responding
constraints (M = .42). We also found a main effect of Trial
Type, F(1, 92) = 33.45, p < .01. As in previous performance
analyses, participants performed better on control trials
as compared to misleading trials. Also consistent with previous analyses, we found a main effect of Group,
F(1, 92) = 62.80, p < .001, and a main effect of Test,
F(1, 92) = 20.14, p < .001. Younger adults performed better
than older adults, and performance was better when participants were given a recognition test as compared to a
cued recall test. As it relates to the examination of losses,
Responding interacted with Test, F(1, 92) = 4.34, p < .01.
Losses were greater when participants were given a recognition test as compared to a cued recall test. Responding
also interacted with Trial Type, F(1, 92) = 33.94, p < .001.
Losses were greater on control trials as compared to misleading trials. Finally, the interaction between Trial Type
and Test was significant, F(1, 92) = 7.07, p < .005. The difference in performance scores between cued recall and recognition was greater on control trials as compared to
misleading trials. No other effects were significant, F's < 1.

J.B. Bulevich, A.K. Thomas / Journal of Memory and Language 67 (2012) 45-58

Control sensitivity and response criteria setting
We compared Somers' D correlations between confidence in each answer and whether or not it was volunteered
to assess control sensitivity. Both older (M = .83) and younger (M = .87) adults demonstrated control sensitivity,
indicating that both groups volunteered answers on the
free-responding test that were associated with high confidence on the forced-responding test. A 2 (Group: Young,
Old)  2 (Test: Cued Recall, Recognition)  2 (Trial Type:
Control, Misleading) ANOVA on these average Somers' D
correlations did not find any significant differences or interactions, F's < 1.
Response criterion estimates were derived following
the procedure developed by Koriat and Goldsmith (1996)
for each trial type. They defined response criterion as the
value on the confidence scale that determines the volunteering decision rule: Any item receiving a confidence rating equal to or greater than the response criterion is
volunteered, while those with confidence ratings below
the criterion are withheld. To determine the response criterion for each individual, we treat each probability rating
used by a participant as a possible candidate for a response
criterion, and then compute the proportion of items conforming to the decision rule. That is, hits are defined as volunteered items that had an assessed probability greater
than or equal to the response criterion, and correct rejections are defined as withheld items that had an assessed
probability less than the response criterion. The proportion
of hits and correct rejections for a possible response criterion is called the fit ratio, and the judgment category with
the largest fit ratio is considered to be that participant's response criterion, PRC (see also, Goldsmith & Koriat, 2008;
Kelley & Sahakyan, 2003). We conducted a 2 (Trial Type:
Control, Misleading)  2 (Test: Cued Recall, Recognition)  2 (Age: Younger, Older) ANOVA on PRC and found
a main effect of Trial Type, F(1, 92) = 4.54, p < .01. Response
criterion was set higher for control trials (M = .86) as compared to misleading trials (M = .82). In addition, we found a
main effect of Age, F(1, 92) = 4.21, p < .05. Younger adults
(M = .86) set a higher response criterion than older adults
(M = .81).
Discussion of Experiment 1
Both older and younger adults demonstrated the misinformation effect. That is, retention was poorer on misleading trials as compared to control trials. The misinformation
effect was greater in older adults than younger adults. Finally, while retention was greater on the recognition test
as compared to the cued recall test, the misinformation effect (the difference in retention between control and misleading trials) was smaller on the cued recall test as
compared to the recognition test. Post-event misinformation also negatively affected monitoring information retained in memory. That is, the relationship between
monitoring and retention was poorer on misleading trials
as compared to control trials. Further, older adults demonstrated a greater monitoring deficit on misleading trials as
compared to younger adults. These data are consistent
with previous research (Dodson & Krueger, 2006; Robinson
et al., 2000), and support the conclusion that older adults'

51

poorer performance in the misinformation paradigm may
be due to inaccurate subjective experiences.
When given the opportunity to withhold responses on
the free responding test, both older and younger adults
withheld responses that accompanied lower confidence
judgments, as demonstrated by the control sensitivity
analysis. While gains in accuracy resulted when participants were given the opportunity to withhold responses,
these gains were accompanied by a loss of the completeness of the report. Importantly, for both older and younger
adults the loss in completeness was greater for control trials as compared to misleading trials. Finally, the impairment in monitoring demonstrated by older adults
negatively influenced their ability to improve memory performance when given the opportunity to withhold answers. That is, younger adults demonstrated greater gains
in performances when given the opportunity to withhold
answers as compared to older adults. This finding may be
due in part to the different response criteria set by each
age group. That is, older adults did set a lower response criterion when compared to younger adults.
Experiment 2
We wanted to determine whether retrieval demands,
when dissociated from test format, would also lead to
improvements in metacognitive accuracy. We hypothesized that when participants were given a cued recall test
they would engage in a more detailed and comprehensive
search process as compared to when given a recognition
test. These search processes should result in both better
relative calibration and more effective withholding. In
Experiment 1, type of test was confounded with hypothesized search processes. In Experiment 2, we attempted to
decouple test format from retrieval demands by using a
procedure that would facilitate a more comprehensive
search process regardless of type of test. Detailed instructions were given to participants before both the recognition and cued recall tests. These instructions were
designed to increase the likelihood that participants would
search for relevant perceptual and contextual cues. We
predicted that when given these supportive instructions,
metacognitive performance would improve even when
participants were given a recognition test. That is, the relatively shallow search process engaged with the recognition test would be enhanced with supportive instructions.
Method
Participants
The participants were 60 younger and 53 older adults.
The participants were tested in groups of either older or
younger participants and received either course credit or
financial compensation ($10 per hour). The younger adults
were Tufts University undergraduates and the older adults
were recruited from the Tufts University Older Adult participant pool. The demographic information for the participants for both experiments is displayed in Table 1. As in
Experiment 1, older adults were prescreened, and only
those who presented as cognitively healthy, were not on

52

J.B. Bulevich, A.K. Thomas / Journal of Memory and Language 67 (2012) 45-58

medications known to affect cognitive functioning, and
who had normal or corrected-to-normal hearing and vision
were tested. The older adults did not differ on level of education or vocabulary score (Salthouse, 1993) from the
younger adults.
Design
The experimental design was a 2  2  2  2 mixed design. The variables were Group (Older or Younger Adults),
Type of Test (Cued Recall or Recognition), Retrieval Support (Supportive Instructions or Standard Instructions),
and Trial Type (Control or Misleading). Group, Type of Test,
and Retrieval Support were between subjects variables.
Materials
The materials were identical to those used in the previous experiments.
Procedure
In the first phase of the experiment, participants were
instructed to watch the video carefully and to pay attention to details because their memories were going to be
tested later. Participants were seated in front of a computer and watch the video using Windows Media Player.
Participants wore headphones. After the video concluded,
participants were given a narrative. The narratives used
in Experiment 2 were identical to those used in Experiment 1. After 10 min, the narratives were collected and
participants completed a short demographics form, a
vocabulary test (Salthouse, 1993), and a payment voucher,
if necessary.
Afterwards, they began the first phase of testing. The
testing phase was similar to the previous experiments,
with the exception that Retrieval Support was varied as
well. Fifty-three older and younger participants completed
the cued recall test. Sixty participants completed the recognition test. Within each test, participants were further
divided into two instructions conditions, a ``standard
instructions'' and a ``supportive instructions'' condition.
In all conditions there were 15 younger adults; thus 60
younger adults participated in this experiment. In the
``standard instructions'' recognition, and the ``supportive
instructions'' recognition conditions, there were 15 older
adults respectively. In the ``standard instructions'' cued
recall condition, there were 12 older adults, and in the
``supportive instructions'' cued recall condition, there were
11 older adults. Three older adults in the standard instructions condition had to be excluded as well as four in the
supportive instructions condition due to noncompliance
with the instructions. Specifically, they did not provide
answers to all items on the forced test.
In the supportive instructions condition, participants
were given additional instructions that were designed to
increase elaborative search processes on the forced test.
Specifically, both older and younger adults were told
``when attempting to answer questions we would like you to
take your time and carefully evaluate all aspects of the information you retrieve. For example, if you are asked about the
color of a person's shirt, try and determine if you can actually
remember the visual image in your head. Or if you are asked
about what someone said, can you remember the sound of

their voice when they said it? Remembering contextual information that occurred directly before or after a particular
event is also helpful in determining the accuracy of your memory. Memory for these details is a good indicator that your
memory is accurate. If you lack this type of information when
you try to remember, it may indicate that your memory is not
accurate. When answering these questions try to carefully inspect these details.'' After these instructions, each question
was read to the participants. The experimenter waited for
participants to answer and provide a confidence rating before reading the next question. The free report memory
test followed in the same manner as described in the previous experiment.
Results
Retention and monitoring of retention
To assess overall retention and the standard misinformation effect we performed a 2 (Trial Type: Control, Misleading)  2 (Support: Supportive, Standard)  2 (Test:
Cued Recall, Recognition)  2 (Group: Older, Younger) ANOVA. The misinformation effect was confirmed with a significant effect of Trial Type, F(1, 105) = 35.51, p < .001. As
can be seen in Table 3, performance was worse on misleading trials (M = .49) as compared to control trials (M = .62). A
main effect of Group was also found, F(1, 105) = 104.44,
p < .001. Older adults demonstrated poorer retention as
compared to younger adults. Importantly, the interaction
between Trial Type and Group was significant, F(1, 105) =
3.99, p < .05. As in Experiment 1, older adults demonstrated
a greater misinformation effect as compared to younger
adults.
As it relates to retrieval demands, we found significant
effects for both Test, F(1, 105) = 52.02, p < .001, and Support, F(1, 105) = 12.23, p < .001. Overall retention was
poorer when participants took a cued recall test (M = .47)
as compared to a recognition test (M = .65). Retention
was better when participants were given supportive
instructions (M = .60) as compared to standard instructions
(M = .51). Finally, the interaction between Trial Type,
Group, and Test was significant, F(1, 105) = 10.09, p < .005.
Older adults demonstrated a greater misinformation effect
when given a recognition test as compared to younger
adults; however, the misinformation effect demonstrated
under cued recall test constraints did not vary as a function
of age.
To examine monitoring effectiveness at retention we
performed a 2 (Trial Type: Control, Misleading),  2 (Support: Supportive Instructions, Standard Instructions)  2
(Test: Cued Recall, Recognition)  2 (Group: Older, Younger) ANOVA on Somers' D correlations. To begin with, we
found a main effect of Group, F(1, 105) = 11.75, p < .005.
Younger adults (M = .56) demonstrated better resolution
than older adults (M = .45). In addition, we found main effects for Support, F(1, 105) = 10.98, p < .001. Resolution
was better when participants were given supportive
instructions (M = .56) as compared to standard instructions
(M = .45). We also found main effects for Trial Type,
F(1, 105) = 14.50, p < .001, and Test, F(1, 105) = 8.20,
p < .005. Resolution was better when participants took a
cued recall test (M = .55) as compared to a recognition test

53

J.B. Bulevich, A.K. Thomas / Journal of Memory and Language 67 (2012) 45-58

Table 3
Measures of memory and monitoring broken down by age, type of test, and type of instructions for Experiment 2. Standard deviations are in parentheses.
Standard

Support

Control

Younger
Forced
Quantity
Accuracy
Monitoring
Free
Quantity
Accuracy
Prc
Older
Forced
Quantity
Accuracy
Monitoring
Free
Quantity
Accuracy
Prc

Misleading

Control

Misleading

CR

REC

CR

REC

CR

REC

CR

REC

.61 (.13)
.61 (.13)
.58 (.26)

.76 (.18)
.76 (.18)
.53 (.25)

.52 (.27)
.52 (.27)
.61 (.20)

.68 (.15)
.68 (.15)
.37 (.27)

.67 (.11)
.67 (.11)
.60 (.24)

.86 (.16)
.86 (.16)
.60 (.25)

.51 (.22)
.51 (.22)
.58 (.24)

.84 (.16)
.84 (.16)
58 (.21)

.52 (.16)
.90 (.14)
.82 (.15)

.61 (.14)
.91 (.15)
.91 (.13)

.49 (.23)
.76 (.24)
.84 (.12)

.48 (.26)
.77 (.35)
.91 (.13)

.49 (.20)
.85 (.20)
.78 (.16)

.53 (.12)
.90 (.12)
.85 (.16)

.46 (.24)
.82 (.16)
.83 (.15)

.55 (.26)
.93 (.13)
.88 (.12)

.33 (.15)
.33 (.15)
.55 (.23)

.58 (.17)
.58 (.17)
.56 (.35)

.26 (.18)
.26 (.18)
.37 (.22)

.35 (.11)
.35 (.11)
.03 (.21)

.45 (.15)
.45 (.15)
.54 (.27)

.69 (.21)
.69 (.21)
.61 (.23)

.38 (.19)
.38 (.19)
.55 (.19)

.39 (.14)
.39 (.14)
.38 (.22)

.25 (.23)
.62 (.38)
.71 (.28)

.40 (.14)
.86 (.17)
.73 (.25)

.15 (.18)
.45 (.29)
.87 (.15)

.26(.21)
.36 (.18)
.84 (.15)

.31 (.17)
.70 (.23)
.84 (.14)

.35 (.20)
.81 (.28)
.84 (.18)

.36 (.25)
.65 (.26)
.83 (.18)

.29 (.18)
.53 (.18)
.84 (.15)

(M = .46). Resolution was better for control trials (M = .57)
as compared to misleading trials (M = .43). As it relates to
retrieval demands, the interactions between Test and Support, F(1, 105) = 4.02, p < .05, and Support and Trial Type,
F(1, 105) = 3.99, p < .05 were both significant. Supportive
instructions had a greater impact on the recognition test
as compared to the cued recall test. Similarly, supportive
instructions had a greater impact on misleading trials as
compared to control trials. Interactions between Trial Type
and Age, F(1, 105) = 7.34, p < .05, and Trial Type and Test,
F(1, 105) = 7.45, p < .05, were also significant. Younger and
older adults demonstrated comparable monitoring effectiveness on control trials; however, older adults were significantly impaired on misleading trials as compared to
younger adults. Finally, the difference in monitoring effectiveness between control and misleading trials was greater
when participants took a recognition test as compared to a
cued recall test.
How monitoring affects control: gains and losses
Performance under the constraints of forced and free
responding was examined to assess gains and losses. Gains
were assessed by comparing forced responding performance, or retention, with accuracy when participants were
given the opportunity to withhold responses. Importantly,
accuracy under free responding constraints was obtained
by dividing the total number correct by the total number
answered. To assess gains, we performed a 2 (Trial Type:
Control, Misleading)  2 (Responding: Forced, Free)  2
(Group: Older, Younger)  2 (Test: Cued Recall, Recognition)  2 (Support: Supportive Instructions, Standard
Instructions) ANOVA. As expected, we found a main effect
of Trial Type, F(1, 105) = 46.39, p < .001. Performance scores
were higher for control trials as compared to misleading trials. We also found a main effect of Responding,
F(1, 105) = 84.55, p < .001. Replicating Experiment 1, performance scores were higher under free responding scoring

constraints as compared to forced responding scoring constraints. Also replicating Experiment 1, we found main effects for Group, F(1, 105) = 129.21, p < .001, and Test,
F(1, 105) = 17.89, p < .001. Younger adults performed better
than older adults, and performance was better when participants were given a recognition test as compared to a cued
recall test. Finally, we found a main effect of Support,
F(1, 105) = 8.30, p < .001. Performance was better when participants were given supportive instructions (M = .67) as
compared to standard instructions (M = .61).
Consistent with Experiment 1, Trial Type interacted
with Age, F(1, 105) = 8.49, p < .005. That is, older adults
demonstrated a greater discrepancy between control and
misleading trials as compared to younger adults. In addition, Trial Type interacted with Support, F(1, 105) = 6.34,
p < .05. Supportive instructions resulted in greater
improvement on misleading trials as compared to control
trials. Finally, the interaction among Trial Type, Test, and
Age was significant, F(1, 105) = 9.87, p < .005. When participants were given a cued recall test, both older and younger adults demonstrated comparable differences between
control and misleading trials. However, when given a recognition test, the difference between control and misleading trials was significantly smaller for younger adults as
compared to older adults.
Consistent with Experiment 1, we found that Responding interacted with Test, F(1, 105) = 84.53, p < .001. When
forced to respond, performance scores were greater when
participants were given a recognition test as compared to
a cued recall test; however, when given the opportunity
to withhold, there was no difference in performance scores
between cued recall and recognition testing. The interaction between Responding, Trial, and Support was also significant, F(1, 105) = 14.53, p < .001. In the standard
instructions group, participants demonstrated gains between forced and free responding on both control and misleading trials; however, the gains were greater on control

54

J.B. Bulevich, A.K. Thomas / Journal of Memory and Language 67 (2012) 45-58

trials as compared to misleading trials. On the other hand,
in the supportive instructions group, the gains were relatively small on control trials (Mgain = .02), yet quite large
on misleading trials (Mgain = .20). No other effects were significant, F's < 1.
In order to examine losses, as with gains, we compared
performance under the constraints of forced and free
responding; however, accuracy when participants were given the opportunity to withhold responses was measured
by dividing the total number correct by the total number
of questions. We conducted a 2 (Trial Type: Control, Misleading)  2 (Responding: Forced, Free)  2 (Group: Older,
Younger)  2 (Test: Cued Recall, Recognition)  2 (Support: Supportive Instructions, Standard Instructions) ANOVA. To begin with, we found main effects for Trial Type,
F(1, 105) = 31.05, p < .001, Responding, F(1, 105) = 74.38,
p < .001, Age, F(1, 105) = 125.58, p < .001, and Test,
F(1, 105) = 27.36, p < .001. All of these main effects replicate findings from Experiment 1. Specifically, we found
that performance scores were higher on control trials as
compared to misleading trials, and that younger adults
performed better than older adults. In addition, performance scores were higher when participants were given
a recognition test as compared to a cued recall test. We
also found that performance scores were higher under
forced responding scoring criteria (M = .56) as compared
to free responding loss criteria (M = .44). This finding demonstrates that there was a loss of accurate information between forced and free responding.
The interaction among Trial Type, Group, and Test was
also significant, F(1, 105) = 5.83, p < .05. When given a cued
recall test, the difference between control and misleading
trials was similar between younger and older adults; however, older adults demonstrated a much larger difference
between control and misleading trials when given a recognition test as compared to younger adults. When losses
were directly assessed by examining the variable of
Responding, we found that Responding interacted with
both Support, F(1, 105) = 7.23, p < .01, and Test, F(1, 105) =
14.22, p < .001. Under the constraints of forced report scoring, performance scores were higher when participants
were given supportive instructions as compared to standard instructions. However, type of instructions did not
influence responding when performance on the free
responding test was examined. That is, when given the
opportunity to withhold, participants demonstrated losses
in accuracy; however, those losses were not influenced by
type of instructions. Regarding the interaction between
Responding and Test, while performance was generally better when participants were given a recognition test as compared to a cued recall test, the discrepancy between cued
recall and recognition was small under free reporting constraints as compared to force reporting constraints. The
interaction between Trial Type and Responding was also
significant, F(1, 105) = 4.63, p < .05. The discrepancy between control and misleading trials was greater under
forced reporting constraints as compared to free reporting
constraints. Finally, the interaction between Trial Type,
Responding, and Support was significant, F(1, 105) = 4.03,
p < .05. Under free responding constraints, the difference
between control and misleading trials was smaller when

participants were given supportive instructions (Mloss = .03)
as compared to standard instructions (Mloss = .09). However, the difference between control and misleading trials
was not affected by instructions under forced reporting
constraints.
Control sensitivity and response criteria setting
We compared Somers' D correlations between confidence in each answer and whether or not it was volunteered to assess control sensitivity. A 2 (Group: Young,
Old)  2 (Test: Cued Recall, Recognition)  2(Support: Supportive Instructions, Standard Instructions) ANOVA on
average Somers' D correlations associated with misleading
trials did not find any significant differences or interactions, F's < 1. A 2 (Group: Young, Old)  2(Test: Cued Recall, Recognition)  2(Support: Supportive Instructions,
Standard Instructions) ANOVA on PRC, found a main effect
of Age, F(1, 92) = 3.85, p < .05. Younger adults (M = .85) set
a higher response criterion than older adults (M = .81).
No other effects were significant.
Discussion of Experiment 2
When retrieval demands were directly instantiated
through supportive instructions, older adults were able to
effectively use those instructions on both cued recall and
recognition memory tests. That is, they demonstrated
improvements in resolution and memory accuracy across
both tests of memory. For younger adults, the most significant benefits of supportive instructions were found when
they were given a recognition test. In fact, supportive
instructions had minimal effect on metamemory monitoring when younger adults were given a cued recall test.
These results suggest that younger adults automatically engaged a deeper, more effective search of memory when given a test (cued recall) that required those processes for
successful metamemorial performance. Older adults
needed additional explicit direction in order to improve
metamemorial monitoring. When examining the pattern
from forced to free reporting, the supportive instructions
improved performance for both younger and older adults.
In addition, the relative gains associated with the supportive instructions were larger for misleading items compared
to control. Older adults also disproportionately benefitted
from the support. However, the supportive instructions
did not accompany a larger loss of correct information
when transitioning from forced to free responding.
General discussion
Research has clearly demonstrated that people incorporate suggested, but incorrect, information into their memory for an event (cf. Loftus, Miller, & Burns, 1978; the
present experiments). In the present study, we used the
misinformation methodology in order to examine the relationship between retention, monitoring, and control for
complex episodic events. In addition, the misinformation
methodology allowed us to examine whether improvements in memory and metamemory could be made even
in cases where participants had to distinguish between

J.B. Bulevich, A.K. Thomas / Journal of Memory and Language 67 (2012) 45-58

multiple and sometimes conflicting sources of information.
To briefly summarize our findings, both groups demonstrated diminished monitoring after misinformation, with
older adults performing even worse than younger adults.
However, when retrieval demands were increased through
test or supportive instructions, monitoring and controlled
withholding improved in both age groups. Direct (type of
instructions) and indirect (type of test) retrieval demand
manipulations had different effects on retention and monitoring. When retrieval demands were increased indirectly
through test, we found that in both age groups, monitoring
improved but retention decreased. When we increased
retrieval demands through instructions, younger adults
demonstrated greater improvements on the recognition
test as compared to the cued recall test. Supportive
instructions positively affected older adults' retention.
Supportive instructions also greatly improved older adults'
retention, monitoring, and controlled withholding, even for
misleading items.
Memory retention is affected by retrieval demands
We examined memory retention through performance
on forced responding tests. The test required that participants respond to every question. This test format strips
away significant aspects of the metamemorial processes
that are included in many other memory tasks (conveying
certainty or choosing not to answer). In the context of both
experiments, retrieval demands had clear effects on memory processes. Specifically, the cued recall test reduced
retention in both older and younger adults, as compared
to the recognition test. However, the pattern was different
when retrieval demands were increased via supportive
instructions. For younger adults, instructions improved
retention on the recognition test. For older adults, supportive instructions improved retention across both tests. We
hypothesized that supportive instructions encouraged
both younger and older adults to engage in a more effortful
search process. The additional aid provided by these
instructions may have been unnecessary when younger
adults were given a cued recall test. Research suggests that
a cued recall test may be more demanding than a recognition test (Roediger & Guynn, 1996); as such, younger adults
may have automatically engaged in a more diagnostic
search when given a cued recall test.
Our research suggests that older adults may require
additional direct support in order to retrieve and use
contextual information. This pattern is consistent with
those found by Thomas and Bulevich (2006). Specifically,
our earlier research demonstrated that when older and
younger adults were instructed as to how to effectively differentiate real from imagined memories, they reduced erroneous memories for performed actions in the imagination
inflation paradigm. Similarly, Hasher and colleagues (see
Ikier, Yang, & Hasher, 2008, for an example) demonstrated
that, particularly under interference conditions, older
adults did not automatically engage in search strategies
that would lead to optimal performance when compared
to younger adults. The present study suggests that older
adults may be able to recruit useful strategies, but require
some direction. This is similar to Craik's (1983) assertion

55

that older adults require environmental support in order
to better utilize their available cognitive resources. Environmental support has been utilized as an explanation for
improved older adult performance when applied to such diverse manipulations as matching encoding and retrieval
contexts (Naveh-Benjamin & Craik, 1995) to requiring
source monitoring judgments at retrieval (Hashtroudi,
Johnson, & Chrosniak, 1989). The instructions given in the
present study were done so at the beginning of the testing
session and participants had to flexibly and strategically
apply those instructions to each judgment made. After
instructions, participants did not receive any additional
source monitoring prompts. That is, they were not encouraged on a judgment-by-judgment basis to discriminate between the original event and the narrative. Rather,
participants had to remember the initial instructions in order to benefit.
Our supportive instructions are conceptually similar to
instructions provided by Lane, Roussel, Starns, Villa, and
Alonzo (2008), in which they provided diagnostic information to participants regarding the characteristics of veridical vs. false memories in the Deese-Roediger-McDermott
paradigm. Interestingly, these instructions were successful
in reducing that type of memory errors in younger but not
older adults. Another recent misinformation study (Holliday et al., 2011) demonstrated improvements in older
adult performance through a retrieval manipulation. Holliday et al. used the cognitive interview after exposure to
misinformation and found that it improved memory performance in both younger and older adults. They argued
that their cognitive interview emphasized the retrieval of
specific perceptual details of the event rather than the general information from the event. This is similar to our supportive instructions, which emphasize the recollection of
contextual information as a way to distinguish between
accurate memories and plausible, but suggested ones.
Clearly, in certain situations older adults can benefit from
instructions; however, the present body of research does
not definitively demonstrate the nature of these situations.
Across these studies, techniques to support retrieval and
materials vary widely. Older adults may not be able to benefit from supportive instructions in situations where to-beremembered information lacks a rich narrative structure,
as is the case in DRM experiments.
Metamemory is affected by retrieval demands
In these experiments, we examined metamemorial
monitoring through resolution. Resolution is a measure
of one's ability, on an item-by-item basis, to distinguish between correct and incorrect answers (Nelson & Narens,
1990). If resolution is good, participants will give high confidence ratings to correctly remembered information and
low confidence ratings to incorrectly remembered information. Further, our research rests on the assumption that
metamemorial monitoring affects metacognitive control
(see Nelson & Narens, 1990, but see Koriat, Ma'ayan, &
Nussinson, 2006 for a different perspective). If monitoring
affects control then when given the opportunity to withhold responses on the free responding tests participants
should withhold those that accompanied low confidence.

56

J.B. Bulevich, A.K. Thomas / Journal of Memory and Language 67 (2012) 45-58

To begin with, both older and younger adults demonstrated poor resolution on misleading trials as compared
to control trials. Resolution was improved in both age
groups when participants were encouraged to engage in
a more effortful retrieval process in a cued recall test (see
Roediger & Guynn, 1996). Further improvement in resolution was garnered with supportive instructions. Younger
adults demonstrated dramatic improvements for misleading items when given supportive instructions before taking
a recognition test. Older adults demonstrated improvements on both cued recall and recognition tests after
receiving supportive instructions. These results suggest
that when given a cued recall test, younger adults may
automatically search for and effectively use relevant contextual information when making confidence judgments.
However, when given a test that required the retrieval of
additional contextual information, older adults may still
need accompanying support to improve their monitoring.
This is consistent with the finding of smaller age related
deficits on recognition test compared to recall tests (Craik
& McDowd, 1987) as well as the general assertion that older adults are particularly impaired in self-initiated controlled processing and disproportionately benefit from
environmental support (Craik, 1983).
In addition, it is important to note that the supportive
instructions did not merely lead to a general criterion shift
in terms of volunteering information. Specifically, after the
supportive instructions, participants did not simply become more conservative. If that were the case, we would
not have observed the differential effects of the supportive
instructions on control as compared to misleading trials.
Borrowing from assumptions made by the source monitoring framework, we hypothesize that misleading post-event
information may lead to a possible conflict at test between
two sources of information (Johnson, Hashtroudi, &
Lindsay, 1993). A shallow retrieval process may bias participants towards the most easily accessible information (see
also Thomas et al., 2010). The misinformation may be more
easily accessed because it is temporally closer to test than
the original event. A deeper, more effortful retrieval process, as engendered through test format, would require
that participants retrieve more contextual information.
That contextual information likely aided monitoring as it
aided retention. Research from other metacognitive domains supports this conclusion. For example, Thomas,
Bulevich, and Dubois (2011) found that feeling-of-knowing
(FOK) judgments were more accurate in predicting future
recognition when participants retrieved contextual information as compared to when they did not. Further, in order
for older adults to demonstrate improvements in FOK
accuracy, contextual information had to be retrieved before
making the FOK judgment. More recent research demonstrates that accuracy of FOK judgments is also influenced
by the amount of correct contextual information retrieved
(Thomas, Dubois, & Bulevich, in preparation). This is
similar to Robinson et al. (2000) where vividness was the
largest predictor of metamemorial accuracy. We would expect vividness to be strongly related to the retrieval of contextual information. Thus, the present findings suggest that
the relationship between confidence and memory performance is improved when participants are encouraged to

retrieve contextual information. Contextual information
is more likely to be retrieved under the constraints of cued
recall as compared to recognition due to the inherent demands of the test.
Finally, because older adults and younger adults differed
significantly with regarding to retention, in order to isolate
metamemorial differences we compared resolution on misleading trials between a subset of older and younger participants whom had been matched on retention. Even on this
subset of older and younger adults, we found that younger
adults (M = .48) demonstrated significantly better resolution as compared to older adults (M = .07), t(37) = 3.75,
p < .005. A similar pattern was found in Experiment 2, when
we compared 24 older adults (M = .35) to 24 younger adults
(M = .58), t(46) = 2.65, p < .01. These results suggest that
older adults' deficits in the misinformation paradigm may
be driven by monitoring deficits that cannot be explained
through impairment in retention alone.
With regarding to withholding, the present results demonstrate that for both older and younger adults, monitoring
influenced withholding. As the control sensitivity data indicate, both groups withheld items that accompanied low
confidence. Thus, by improving monitoring resolution, we
improved the effectiveness of withholding. Specifically,
when retrieval demands were increased older and younger
participants were able to take better advantage of the
opportunity to withhold responses. As with the effect on
monitoring effectiveness, younger participants reaped the
greatest reward from the supportive instructions on the
recognition test. The supportive instructions improved older adults' controlled processing across both types of test.
Older adults were able to improve their performance
greatly by withholding items when given supportive
instructions compared to when they were not (29% vs.
1%). Further, the gains garnered through support did not
accompany greater losses. Taken together, this suggests
that the age-deficit in episodic memory tasks may at least
partially be due to a failure at retrieval to search for contextual information that would inform their memorial
decisions.
Conclusions and final thoughts
Control of memory and the subjective experiences that
accompany it remain a topic of debate and inquiry among
psychologists. The present experiments examined how retrieval demands influenced confidence and control over
memory in the misinformation paradigm. The experiments
demonstrated that older adults' are more susceptible to
misinformation as compared to younger adults. We also
demonstrated that older adults showed greater metamemorial deficits as compared to younger adults. As compared to younger adults, they were more impaired in
regard to monitoring effectiveness, and less likely to
improve memory accuracy when given the opportunity
to withhold responses. Most importantly, our research
demonstrated that the cues derived from the additional retrieval effort engendered by test format and instructions
were instrumental in improving metamemorial accuracy.
The improvement was greater in older adults than younger
adults.

J.B. Bulevich, A.K. Thomas / Journal of Memory and Language 67 (2012) 45-58

The complex relationship found in the present study
between monitoring and control suggests that explanations of the misinformation effect should not neglect metamemorial processes. The present data strongly suggests
that the disruption of metamemorial monitoring was a
large factor in producing memory errors in this paradigm
especially for older adults. However, we were able to
improve performance in several different ways. Allowing
people to withhold answers compared to forcing them to
respond, and increasing retrieval demands both reduced
errors. Thus allowing people to exercise control and engage
more effortful retrieval processes (either through test format or instructions) appears to improve the relationship
between confidence and memory performance.
Acknowledgments
This research was partially supported by a departmental research grant from Washington University, a National
Institute of Health grant, and a Tufts University Faculty Research Award. We would like to thank Roddy Roediger and
Pascal Boyer who provided helpful comments and feedback from the genesis through the completion of this research. We would also like to thank Joe Nah, Samia
Zahran, and Johanna Seiden for help with data collection
and coding.
References
20th Century Fox Television (2001). 24 [DVD]. (Available from 20th
Century Fox Home Video, P.O. Box 900, Beverly Hills, CA 90213-0900).
Allen-Burge, R., & Storandt, M. (2000). Age equivalence in feeling-ofknowing experiences. Journals of Gerontology: Series B: Psychological
Sciences and Social Sciences, 55B(4), 214-233.
Backman, L., & Karlsson, T. (1985). The relation between level of general
knowledge and feeling-of-knowing: An adult age study. Scandinavian
Journal of Psychology, 26, 249-258.
Butterfield, E. C., Nelson, T. O., & Peck, V. (1988). Developmental aspects of
the feeling of knowing. Developmental Psychology, 24, 654-663.
Cohen, G., & Faulkner, D. (1989). Age differences in source forgetting:
Effects on reality monitoring and on eyewitness testimony.
Psychology & Aging, 4, 10-17.
Coxon, P., & Valentine, T. (1997). The effects of the age of eyewitnesses on
the accuracy and suggestibility of their testimony. Applied Cognitive
Psychology, 11(5), 415-430.
Craik, F. I. M. (1983). On the transfer of information from temporary to
permanent memory. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of
London B, 302, 341-359.
Craik, F. I., & McDowd, J. M. (1987). Age differences in recall and
recognition. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 13, 474-479.
Dodson, C. S., & Krueger, L. E. (2006). I misremember it well: Why older
adults are unreliable eyewitnesses. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review,
13(5), 770-775.
Dodson, C. S., Bawa, S., & Krueger, L. E. (2007). Aging, metamemory, and
high-confidence errors: A misrecollection account. Psychology and
Aging, 22(1), 122-133.
Eakin, D. K., Schreiber, T. A., & Sergent-Marshall, S. (2003). Misinformation
effects in eyewitness memory: The presence and absence of memory
impairment as a function of warning and misinformation
accessibility. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 29(5), 813-825.
Goldsmith, M., & Koriat, A. (2008). The strategic regulation of memory
accuracy and informativeness. In A. Benjamin & B. Ross (Eds.).
Psychology of learning and motivation: Memory use as skilled cognition
(Vol. 48, pp. 1-60). San Diego, CA: Elsevier.
Hashtroudi, S., Johnson, M. K., & Chrosniak, L. D. (1989). Aging and source
monitoring. Psychology and Aging, 4, 106-112.

57

Holliday, R. E., Humphries, J. E., Milne, R., Memon, A., Houlder, L., & Lyons,
A., et al. (2011). Reducing misinformation effects in older adults with
cognitive interview. Mnemonics. Psychology and Aging. doi:10.1037/
a0022031.
Ikier, S., Yang, L., & Hasher, L. (2008). Implicit interference, age, and
automatic versus controlled retrieval strategy. Psychological Science,
19, 456-461.
Jacoby, L. L., & Hollingshead, A. (1990). Reading student essays may be
hazardous to your spelling: Effects of reading incorrectly and
correctly spelled words. Canadian Journal of Psychology, 44, 345-358.
Jacoby, L. L., Bishara, A. J., Hessels, S., & Toth, J. P. (2005). Aging, subjective
experience and cognitive control: Dramatic false remembering by
older adults. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 134,
131-148.
Johnson, M. K., Hashtroudi, S., & Lindsay, D. S. (1993). Source monitoring.
Psychological Bulletin, 114(1), 3-28.
Karayianni, I., & Gardiner, J. M. (2003). Transferring voice effects in
recognition memory from remembering to knowing. Memory &
Cognition, 31, 1052-1059.
Karpel, M. E., Hoyer, W. J., & Toglia, M. P. (2001). Accuracy and qualities of
real and suggested memories: Nonspecific age differences. Journals of
Gerontology: Series B: Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences, 56,
103-110.
Kelley, C. M., & Sahakyan, L. (2003). Memory, monitoring, and control in
the attainment of memory accuracy. Journal of Memory and Language,
48(4), 704-721.
Koriat, A., & Goldsmith, M. (1996). Monitoring and control processes in
the strategic regulation of memory accuracy. Psychological Review,
103(3), 490-517.
Koriat, A., Ma'ayan, H., & Nussinson, R. (2006). The intricate relationships
between monitoring and control in metacognition: Lessons for the
cause-and-effect relation between subjective experience and
behavior. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 135, 36-69.
Lachman, J. L., Lachman, R., & Thronesbery, C. (1979). Metamemory
through the adult life span. Developmental Psychology, 15(5), 543-551.
Lane, S. M., Roussel, C. C., Starns, J. J., Villa, D., & Alonzo, J. D. (2008).
Providing information about diagnostic features at retrieval reduces
false recognition. Memory, 16(8), 836-851.
Loftus, E. F. (1979). Eyewitness testimony. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Loftus, E. F., Miller, D. G., & Burns, H. J. (1978). Semantic integration of
verbal information into a visual memory. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Learning and Memory, 4(1), 19-31.
Lovelace, E. A., & Marsh, G. R. (1985). Prediction and evaluation of
memory performance by young and old adults. Journal of Gerontology,
40, 192-197.
Marquie, J. C., & Huet, N. (2000). Age differences in feeling-of-knowing
and confidence judgments as a function of knowledge domain.
Psychology and Aging, 15, 451-461.
Mitchell, K. J., Johnson, M. K., & Mather, M. (2003). Source monitoring and
suggestibility to misinformation: Adult age-related differences.
Applied Cognitive Psychology, 17(1), 107-119.
Naveh-Benjamin, M., & Craik, F. I. M. (1995). Memory for context and its
use in item memory: Comparisons of younger and older persons.
Psychology and Aging, 10, 284-293.
Nelson, T. O., & Narens, L. (1990). Metamemory: A theoretical framework
and new findings. In G. Bower (Ed.). The psychology of learning and
motivation (Vol. 26, pp. 125-140). New York: Academic Press.
Pansky, A., Goldsmith, M., Koriat, A., & Pearlman-Avnion, S. (2009).
Memory accuracy in old age: Cognitive, metacognitive, and
neurocognitive determinants. European Journal of Cognitive
Psychology, 21, 303-329.
Pannu, J. K., & Kaszniak, A. W. (2005). Metamemory experiments in
neurological populations: A review. Neuropsychology Review, 15,
105-130.
Perfect, T. J., & Stollery, B. T. (1993). Memory and metamemory
performance in older adults: One deficit or two? Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 46A, 119-135.
Perrotin, A., Isingrini, M., Souchay, C., Clarys, D., & Taconnat, L. (2006).
Episodic feeling of-knowing accuracy and cued recall in the elderly:
Evidence for double dissociation involving executive function and
processing speed. Acta Psychologica, 122, 58-73.
Reder, L. M., Wible, C., & Martin, J. (1986). Differential memory changes
with age: Exact retrieval versus plausible inference. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 12, 72-81.
Rhodes, M. G., & Kelley, C. M. (2005). Executive processes, memory
accuracy, and memory monitoring: An aging and individual
differences analysis. Journal of Memory and Language, 52, 578-594.

58

J.B. Bulevich, A.K. Thomas / Journal of Memory and Language 67 (2012) 45-58

Robinson, M. D., & Johnson, J. T. (1996). Recall memory, recognition
memory, and the eyewitness confidence-accuracy correlation. Journal
of Applied Psychology, 81, 587-594.
Robinson, M. D., Johnson, J. T., & Robertson, D. A. (2000). Process vs.
content in eyewitness memory monitoring. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Applied, 6(3), 207-221.
Roediger, H. L., & Guynn, M. J. (1996). Retrieval processes. In E. L. Bjork &
R. A. Bjork (Eds.), Human memory (pp. 197-236). San Diego: Academic
Press.
Roediger, H. L., Jacoby, J. D., & McDermott, K. B. (1996). Misinformation
effects in recall: Creating false memories through repeated retrieval.
Journal of Memory and Language. Special Issue: Illusions of Memory,
35(2), 300-318.
Salthouse, T. A. (1993). Speed and knowledge as determinants of adult age
differences in verbal tasks. Journal of Gerontology: Psychological
Sciences, 29-36.
Souchay, C., Isingrini, M., & Espagnet, L. (2000). Aging, episodic memory
feeling-of-knowing, and frontal functioning. Neuropsychology, 14(2),
299-309.
Souchay, C., Moulin, C. J., Clarys, D., Taconnat, L., & Isingrini, M. (2007).
Diminished episodic memory awareness in older adults: Evidence
from feeling of knowing and recollection. Consciousness & Cognition,
16(4), 769-784.
Thomas, A. K., & Bulevich, J. B. (2006). Effective cue utilization reduces
memory errors in older adults. Psychology and Aging, 21(2), 379-389.

Thomas, A. K., Bulevich, J. B., & Chan, J. C. K. (2010). Testing promotes
eyewitness accuracy with a warning - Implications for retrieval
enhanced suggestibility. Journal of Memory and Language, 63,
149-157.
Thomas, A. K., Bulevich, J. B., & Dubois, S. (2011). The role of contextual
information in episodic feeling of knowing. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 37, 96-108.
Thomas, A. K., Dubois, S. J., & Bulevich, J. B. (in preparation). The dynamic
interplay between the quality and quantity of contextual information
in the feeling of knowing.
Weingardt, K. R., Leonesio, R. J., & Loftus, E. F. (1994). Knowing about
knowing. In J. Metcalfe & A. Shimamura (Eds.), Viewing eyewitness
research from a metacognitive perspective (pp. 157-184). Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press, Bradford Books.
Weingardt, K. R., Toland, H. K., & Loftus, E. F. (1994). Reports of suggested
memories: Do people truly believe them? In D. F. Ross, J. D. Read, & M.
P. Toglia (Eds.), Adult eyewitness testimony: Current trends and
developments (pp. 3-26). New York, NY, US: Cambridge University
Press.
Wixted, J. T., & Stretch, V. (2004). In defense of the signal-detection
interpretation of Remember/Know judgments. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 11, 616-641.
Yonelinas, A. P. (2001). Consciousness, control, and confidence. The 3 Cs of
recognition memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 130,
361-379.

