Journal of Memory and Language 67 (2012) 468-485

Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect

Journal of Memory and Language
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jml

How pragmatic interpretations arise from conditionals: Profiling the
Affirmation of the Consequent argument with reaction time and EEG
measures q
Mathilde Bonnefond a,b,, Jean-Baptiste Van der Henst a,, Marion Gougain a, Suzanne Robic a,
Matthew D. Olsen a, Oshri Weiss a, Ira Noveck a,c,
a
b
c

Laboratoire sur le Langage, le Cerveau et la Cognition (L2C2), CNRS Universite Lyon 1, France
Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Centre de recherche francais a Jerusalem (CRFJ), CNRS-MAEE, Israel

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 29 November 2011
revision received 20 July 2012
Available online 13 September 2012
Keywords:
Conditional reasoning
Experimental pragmatics
N200
P300
P600

a b s t r a c t
Conditional reasoning consists in combining a conditional premise with a categorical premise and inferring a conclusion from them. Two well-known conditional arguments are
Modus Ponens (MP: If P then Q; P//therefore Q), which is logically valid and Affirmation of
the Consequent (AC: If P then Q; Q//therefore P), which is not. The latter is often accepted
as true on pragmatic grounds under the generally accepted assumption that the conditional
premise is transformed so as to justify a biconditional reading (p if-and-only-if q). We present
results from two experiments - one using self-paced measures and the other electroencephalography (EEG) - while comparing participants' evaluations of MP and AC arguments. Based
on prior work, we anticipated finding two types of individuals as a function of their endorsing
or rejecting AC arguments. The self-paced task (Experiment 1) shows that Rejecters of AC
arguments are linked to especially long response times with respect to Endorsers and, critically, shows that AC argument's minor premise prompts slowdowns among all participants
compared to MP's. The EEG study (Experiment 2) reveals that the minor premise in AC arguments prompts both Rejecters and Endorsers to produce an N200 wave, which the literature
associates with a violation of expectations. These findings suggest that the second premise of
AC arguments arrives unexpectedly even among those who are ultimately Endorsers. We
describe how these findings impact the conditional reasoning literature.
O 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Introduction
q

The authors wish to thank Victor Ferreira and three anonymous
reviewers for their incisive comments. This work was supported by a
Fyssen foundation grant awarded to the first author and by the French
ANR ``Neuroreasoning'' awarded to the last author.
 Corresponding authors. Addresses: Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behavior, Radboud University, Kapittelweg 29, 6525 EN
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. Fax: +31 (0)24 36 10989 (M. Bonnefond),
L2C2, CNRS Universite Lyon 1, Institut des Sciences Cognitives, 67, Bd
Pinel, 69675 Bron, France. Fax: +33 (0)4 37 91 12 10 (J.-B. Van der Henst
and I. Noveck).
E-mail addresses: m.bonnefond@fcdonders.ru.nl (M. Bonnefond),
vanderhenst@isc.cnrs.fr (J.-B. Van der Henst), noveck@isc.cnrs.fr
(I. Noveck).
0749-596X/$ - see front matter O 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2012.07.007

The conditional is arguably the most studied logical
expression in the cognitive sciences. Entire books are devoted to If (Evans & Over, 2004) and explanations concerning its comprehension hold a central place in linguistics
(e.g. Horn, 2000), philosophy (e.g., Stalnaker, 1968), and,
of course, in the psychology of reasoning (Braine & O'Brien,
1991; Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1991). One of the reasons it
garners so much attention is that it is often linked with
inference forms that are pragmatically justifiable while
not being logically valid.

M. Bonnefond et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 67 (2012) 468-485

To appreciate one such form, consider the Affirmation
of the Consequent (AC) argument, which is the focus of
our investigations and presented in (1) below:
(1)

If Jean goes to the movies,
then he travels by bicycle.

If P then Q

Jean travels by bicycle.
Therefore, he goes to the movies.

Q
)P

From a logical point of view, this argument is fallacious
because the major premise is compatible with possibilities
in which John travels by bicycle and does not go to the
movies (e.g., imagine Jean is actually traveling by bicycle
to go to the opera). Nevertheless, its conclusion is endorsed
at rates ranging from roughly 25% to 75%, indicating that
participants find ways to make this conclusion acceptable
(for summaries, see Evans, 1993; Girotto, Mazzocco, &
Tasso, 1997). In due course, we consider how theorists
account for these responses but, for now, we provide more
background on conditional arguments.
We turn to Modus Ponens (MP), represented in (2) below, which has the same elements as AC, but is central to
logic and intuitively well understood:
(2)

If Jean goes to the movies,
then he travels by bicycle.

If P then Q

Jean goes to the movies.
Therefore, he travels by bicycle.

P
)Q

The minor premise in (2) represents the conditional's
antecedent, which provides a means for arriving at a logical conclusion. Not surprisingly, experimental participants
typically endorse arguments such as the one in (2) at rates
approaching ceiling.
Now that one can see how a minor premise determines
a conditional argument's logical validity, we complete our
panorama and justify our focus on AC by presenting the
two remaining arguments that are traditionally associated
with conditionals. One is the logically valid Modus Tollens
(MT), which is If P then Q; not-Q/Therefore, not-P. When its
minor premise negates the conditional's consequent, the
antecedent cannot have been true. The remaining one is
the Denial of the Antecedent (DA), which is If P then Q;
not-P/Therefore, not-Q. Its minor premise, much like AC's,
makes it a non-starter for logical inference-making; however, it also prompts substantial rates of pragmatically justifiable endorsements. Given that the DA argument adds a
layer of complexity with negations, AC ends up being the
simplest pragmatically justifiable argument, making it
the most amenable for investigation.
In the remainder of the Introduction, we take the following four steps. First, we describe the rich seminal accounts
from both the linguistic-pragmatic and psychology-of-reasoning literatures as they pertain to the processing of AC
arguments. We describe (a) a wide consensus that assumes
that AC endorsements are carried out routinely and
smoothly, as well as; (b) two accounts of AC rejections. Second, we summarize conflicting reports from experimental

469

investigations of on-line processing related to AC. While
Marcus and Rips (1979) reported that endorsed AC arguments are processed at speeds comparable to MP (and that
AC rejections are slower than both), Barrouillet, Grosset,
and Lecas (2000) found that endorsed AC arguments are
processed more slowly than MP. Third, we present Barrouillet et al.'s account for their reported slowdown, which
views an endorsed AC argument as on a par theoretically
with MP but as one whose minor premise is simply less preferred. We then present our hypothesis, which proposes
that the minor premise of AC arguments is generally unexpected and that endorsements result from post hoc justifications. Fourth, we describe how we bring fine temporal
measures to the questions raised through self-paced measures in Experiment 1 and electroencephalography (EEG)
in Experiment 2.
Theoretical background
Although they offer differing explanations, the linguistic-pragmatic and the psychology-of-reasoning literatures
actually agree that endorsed AC arguments are processed
routinely. According to linguistic-pragmatists, endorsements of AC arguments are the result of phenomena that
essentially enrich the semantics of conditionals. Horn
(2000), for one, assumes that If P then Q is understood as
the biconditional P if and only if Q. According to this proposal, such a transformation is comparable to other processes of strengthening in language. Consider how the
generic term ``drink'' (as in ``Would you like to have a
drink'') often refers more specifically to an alcoholic beverage or how ``I don't believe that p'' is understood more narrowly as ``I believe that not-p.'' Strengthening in conditional
statements occurs when the antecedent, which is formally
only sufficient for generating the consequent, acts as both
sufficient and necessary. After such a transformation, AC
endorsements are considered as elementary as MP.
Other linguists argue that a conditional is viewed as a
biconditional through invited inferences (Geis & Zwicky,
1971; van der Auwera, 1997). These are pragmatic inferences that optionally piggy-back on the conditional. Under
appropriate contexts, If P then Q prompts the emergence of
a form such as If Q then P. Specialists in the psychology of
reasoning who incorporate the notion of invited inference
include Braine and O'Brien (1991). They argue that invited
inferences are applied unless there is something in the
context that ``countermands'' them (p. 189) and, once in
place, the participant treats the minor premise of the AC
in a way similar to Modus Ponens (Rumain, Connell, &
Braine, 1983).
As can be seen, neither of these accounts readily
describes how reasoners reject AC arguments. This leads
us to summarize two other well-known psychological approaches that agree that AC arguments are endorsed routinely. However, they also aim to explain how AC is
rejected.
The first comes from Mental Models (Johnson-Laird &
Byrne, 1991), which views reasoning as an analogical process that combines and elaborates upon representative
models. It views AC inferences as akin to MP since both
stem from the same representation in (3):

470

(3)

M. Bonnefond et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 67 (2012) 468-485

PQ
...

The first line refers to the ``initial'' model and the three
dots below it refer to further possible combinations that
could eventually render the conditional true. According
to the earliest versions of Mental Models (e.g., Johnson
Laird, Byrne, & Schaeken, 1992), AC is endorsed because
the procedure dictates that a reasoner find a match between the minor premise (Q) and the model in (3) which
then generates the conclusion P. The same process can be
applied to MP (with the minor premise, P).
Participants who reject AC, on the other hand, are those
who flesh out the model. For that to occur, two other true
models associated with the conditional are generated as in
(4) below:
(4)

P Q
:P Q
:P :Q

Here, participants recognize that the minor premise in AC
engages two possible models, making the argument indeterminate (Rader & Sloutsky, 2002).
The other reasoning account we consider comes from
suppositional theory (Evans, 2006), which adopts a format
similar to Mental Models (Byrne & Johnson-Laird, 2009)
but views conditional reasoning more probabilistically. It
assumes that ordinary people process the conditional by
supposing P, adding it to their stock of knowledge and
running a mental simulation in order to evaluate Q;
ultimately, they make subjective probability judgments
about Q given P. Upon hearing a conditional, listeners assume that there is a high conditional probability between
antecedent and consequent.
Advocates of suppositional theory assume that AC processing follows fluidly from the processing of conditionals
in two related ways. One way is to incorporate forms of invited inference in the conditional's initial representations
(see Oberauer, 2006). The other is to situate reasoning
within Evans's dual systems of reasoning account, where
System 1 is fast acting, automatic and parallel and System
2 is slow operating, rule-based and sequential (see also
Frederick, 2005; Kahneman, 2003; Sloman, 1996). Assuming that invited inferences are a System 1 affair, they could
be overridden by System 2 leading to ``deeper'' processing
(Evans, Handley, Neilens, & Over, 2007, p. 1774). Evans and
colleagues argue that such deeper processing can occur
when meaningful materials are used (e.g. deontic conditionals such as If you are drinking alcohol then you must be
over 18 encourage fewer AC endorsements than an arbitrary causal conditional, such as If the switch is down then
the light goes on) or through individual differences centering on memory capacities and general intelligence (Evans,
Handley, Neilens, & Over, 2008, 2009; Evans et al., 2007).
A host of experiments support the claim that AC rejections are associated with deeper processing. For example,
while using arbitrary materials, Evans et al. (2007) showed

that AC arguments are more likely to be rejected by those
who score higher on a test of General Intelligence (see also,
Evans et al., 2008). Other work has shown that those with
greater working-memory abilities are more likely to reject
AC arguments than those who have weaker abilities (De
Neys, Schaeken & d'Ydewalle, 2005; Evans et al., 2009).
Many have also noticed that adults are more likely than
children to reject AC arguments (Barrouillet, Markovits, &
Quinn, 2002; Markovits & Barrouillet, 2002) and if one assumes that children process conditional arguments more
shallowly than adults, this makes sense. These kinds of
data have solidified the proposal that one can divide participants into shallow and deep processors (Evans, 2006;
Evans et al., 2007; Sperber, Cara, & Girotto, 1995). This sort
of distinction will be useful to our own analyses later.
As can be seen, all seminal accounts consider it noncontroversial that participants endorse AC arguments in a
routine manner, i.e. automatically or shallowly. Proposals
from linguistic-pragmatics point to an enrichment of some
kind, one that affects the interpretation of the conditional
premise so that AC processing becomes similar to that of
MP. Proposals from the psychology of reasoning view AC
endorsement as resulting from some form of superficial
treatment that does not distinguish it terribly from MP.
Two psychological theories further anticipate rejections
of AC arguments, which come with fleshing out, further
cues or more effortful processing.
We now turn to the psychological literature's small set
of processing experiments in order to determine the extent
to which their results are consistent with the theoretical
depictions. We will focus on reaction times related to the
AC arguments' two sorts of reactions - endorsements and
rejections. We will also highlight how the reaction times
of AC endorsements compare to those of MP.
Experimental background: Time course
Two behavioral studies have succeeded in measuring
online treatments of AC arguments. The first comes from
Marcus and Rips (1979, Experiment 2), who presented conditional statements in all four of the standard forms - MP,
AC, DA and MT - while using arbitrary content (e.g. If a card
has an A on the left then it has a 1 on the right). They provided an entire argument tachistoscopically with one
(affirmative or negative) conclusion, rendering any individual argument compatible or incompatible with each of the
four forms.
They reported that the evaluation times related to
endorsing AC and MP arguments were comparable
(1813 ms and 1907 ms, respectively). However, only a
third of the responses to AC were endorsed whereas all
MP arguments were, with AC rejections taking much longer (2437 ms). As can be observed, these results are perfectly consistent with the narrative from the theories
above: Pragmatic transformations on the conditional, or
superficial treatments of them, lead to endorsed AC arguments whose latencies are indistinguishable from those
for MP; however, rejections of AC arguments entail deeper
processing.
Barrouillet et al. (2000, Exp. 1) also used reaction times
to investigate the endorsement patterns of all four

M. Bonnefond et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 67 (2012) 468-485

conditional arguments but with a much different design.
While also using arbitrary content (e.g. If the flowers are
artificial then he puts them on the right), participants were
required to hold a conditional premise in memory as a
series of minor premise-conclusion combinations were
presented. Thus, reaction times concerned these combinations. They found rates of AC endorsements (79%) that are
among the highest in the literature; more importantly, the
associated response times (2355 ms) were significantly
slower than MP's (2018 ms). Reaction times of those who
rejected AC were not reported.
Accounts for slowdowns in the AC's minor premise
How do Barrouillet and colleagues account for these
results? They concede that the slowdowns are hard to
interpret (see Barrouillet et al., 2000, pp. 253-255). One
hypothesis is that invited inferences arise with the minor
premise (and not with the conditional premise). Their second hypothesis, which abides by Mental Model theory, begins by assuming that MP and AC are on par in terms of
inferential value. However, taking into consideration a suggestion from Evans (1993, p. 9), they further propose that
the conditional form in If P then Q is endowed with an
intrinsic directionality that leads to faster inference-making when going ``forward,'' i.e. from the antecedent to the
consequent as in MP rather than going ``backward'' as in
AC. This result has led some to assume that listeners basically have a general preference for MP over AC inferences
(e.g., Oberauer, 2006, p. 279).
It pays to make two points here. One is that Barrouillet
et al.'s paradigm (whose measure is based on a minor premise-conclusion combination) is not in a position to isolate
the minor premise as a source of the slowdown. The other
is that the original insight about directionality was, not
that AC endorsements are generally less available than
MP but only, that certain formulations can encourage AC
endorsements more than others. That is, Evans (1993, see
Table 3) showed that the relative endorsement rates that
followed from If P then Q reapportion themselves slightly
when P only if Q is employed instead. Endorsement rates
with If-then are about 90% for MP and 60% for AC while
with only-if they are about 80% for MP and 70% for AC. That
said, the asymmetric result between AC and MP in the
wake of classic If-then statements calls for investigation
and, if confirmed, its source needs elucidation. This is at
the heart of the work here, which prompts us now to present our own hypothesis.
We view the slowdowns discovered in Barrouillet
et al.'s task as being the result of raised expectations. When
a listener comprehends If P then Q, she is conversationally
being asked to anticipate hearing information about P; in
other words, the mention of a conditional implies that
the minor premise of MP is imminent or at least highly relevant. This makes MP fundamentally different than AC (see
Allott & Uchida, (2009) for a similar argument). We also
propose that raised expectations entail a cost on the part
of the listener - in a graded fashion - such that the more
time devoted to raising expectations the more likely it is
the listener will be satisfied only with the conditional's
antecedent as a minor premise. A secondary prediction

471

then is that increasing effort attributed to processing AC
ultimately translates into higher rates of rejection.
Prior work from our group is consistent with this
hypothesis. Findings from Van der Henst, Bujakowska,
Ciceron, and Noveck (2007) showed that participants
who received AC arguments in a word-by-word manner
were more likely to reject them than those who received
identical arguments in a sentence-by-sentence manner.
This result indicates that extra processing time (which
was intrinsic to the word-by-word presentation) is linked
to restricting expectations about the upcoming minor premise. Even more revealing is EEG work from two of the
authors (Bonnefond & Van der Henst, 2009), who have
shown that the minor premise (P) in a traditionally ordered
MP argument (If P then Q; P) leads to P3b activity (centroparietal positivity peaking around 300 ms) when compared to the same premise appearing first as part of an
inverted argument (as in P; If P then Q). Given that the
EEG literature considers P3b activity a reflection of satisfied expectations (for a review, see Picton, 1992), this represents strong confirmation of our hypothesis. An equally
important finding from that study is that an irrelevant minor premise (e.g., If P then Q; I) leads to an N2 component
(frontal negativity activity peaking around 200 ms), which
is usually interpreted as a violation of an expectation (for a
review, see Folstein & Van Petten, 2008). Together, these
findings suggest that what classically follows if-then either
satisfies expectations or does not. It also indicates that the
P3b and the N2 can be usefully employed in an AC investigation. We will discuss these components and the conclusions one can draw from them in greater detail in the
introduction of Experiment 2.
The current experiments
Our goal is twofold and the first is fundamental: Given
the current state of affairs, it is still not clear that AC
endorsements - when compared to MP - lead to slowdowns nor that the minor premise alone is their source.
One prominent study (Marcus & Rips, 1979) reveals a null
effect when entire arguments are presented and the other
shows that there is a slowdown (Barrouillet et al., 2000)
linked to the presentation of the minor premise and conclusion together. While two other studies have addressed
the presumed asymmetry between MP and AC arguments,
one (Santamaria & Espino, 2002) combines the comprehension times of endorsed and rejected AC arguments
and the other investigates non-standard conditional reasoning (Oberauer, Hornig, Weidenfeld, & Wilhelm, 2005).
Neither addresses the first question we raise here: Which
of the two original claims can be confirmed and which
rejected.
In Experiment 1, we present a self-paced comprehension task where participants control argument uptake as
they read the Major (Conditional) Premise, the Minor Premise of a MP or AC argument and then a conclusion (note
that we employ traditional orders throughout). If the minor
premise of AC prompts slowdowns compared to the one in
MP, Barrouillet et al.'s claim would be confirmed. Under the
assumption that individual differences can reveal the way
slowdowns interact with AC processing, we also categorize

472

M. Bonnefond et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 67 (2012) 468-485

participants as Endorsers and Rejecters while recording
their self-imposed uptake. (These names refer to participants who either endorse or reject AC arguments.) To anticipate, this experiment does reveal that the minor premise of
AC arguments prompts slowdowns when compared to the
minor premise of MP, even among those who ultimately
endorse both.
This leads to our second goal, which is to distinguish between the directionality account and our own hypothesis.
In Experiment 2, we employ a paradigm that is similar to
Experiment 1's, except that - instead of being self-paced
- it employs techniques from EEG. The question we ask
is whether the minor premise of an AC argument prompts
a P3b akin to the one in MP arguments or an N2 akin to the
one found with irrelevant minor premises. If one assumes,
as do all the seminal theories, that endorsed AC arguments
are carried out in ways similar to MP arguments, one
would anticipate a P3b for an AC minor premise. This applies to the directionality account as well which would argue for a P3b, but one that is perhaps slightly weaker than
MP's. According to a raised expectations account, anything
other than the antecedent of an if-then statement ought to
be surprising. This leads to the novel prediction that one
would find an N2 among all minor premises of AC arguments; a corollary is that the effect should be especially
strong among those who ultimately reject AC arguments.

Experiment 1
This reasoning paradigm presents a series of conditional
arguments that require participants to determine whether
or not the provided conclusion logically follows from the
premises. Below, we point out four of its features. We also
explain how these features compare with those in prior
conditionals tasks.
First, unlike most studies on conditionals, we focus on
two (and not all four) conditional arguments. Nevertheless,
the main experimental task provides four sorts of trials.
These are trials that begin with the premise set for a standard Modus Ponens argument (If P then Q; P) and that ultimately provide a Compatible (Q) or Incompatible (R)
conclusion as well as trials that begin with the premise set
for Affirmation of the Consequent arguments (If P then Q;
Q) and that ultimately provide a Compatible (P) or Incompatible (S) conclusion. One can see that MP serves as an
apt control because it is (a) valid, (b) contains the same content (in a different validity-inducing order), and; (c) has historically proven to be unproblematic for participants.
Second, like Barrouillet et al. (2000) and to a large extent Marcus and Rips (1979), we use content that avoids
thematic (e.g. causal or deontic) conditional interpretations. We thus stick with what the literature has dubbed
basic conditionals (Evans, Ellis, & Newstead, 1996) by using
letters, such as If there is a T then there is a B, in the task's
arguments. An Incompatible conclusion is thus expressed
as a previously unmentioned letter. For example, one
MP-Incompatible condition appears as If there is a T then
there is a B; There is an T//There is a J.
Third, we set up the investigation so that we can capture latencies from participants as they read each premise

and then the conclusion. This sequential analysis allows us
to investigate the processing of individual premises as participants carry out the argument, which is essential for a
refined understanding of the AC reasoning process. In particular, it will allow us to identify the part of the argument
that prompts extra effort. While we expect slowdowns
linked to rejections, our method can also help determine
the way endorsers handle AC arguments. After all, our
main goal is to determine whether or not AC arguments
are handled with the same relative ease as MP arguments.
We plan on focusing on the minor premise because (a) it
represents the earliest moment that conditional inference-making can take place (see Lea, 1995; Reverberi
et al., 2007), (b) it represents the earliest moment that valid logical reasoning can be distinguished from pragmatic
processing and, because; (c) prior work has indicated that
the minor premise of the MP argument comes with satisfied expectations (Bonnefond & Van der Henst, 2009).
The degree to which AC and MP arguments are similar at
the Minor Premise remains to be seen.
Fourth, we take advantage of individual differences.
That is, Endorsers and Rejecters can be compared as we
determine how they process AC and MP arguments and
from the first premise through the conclusion. If there
are differences between groups of participants (as one
would expect) it becomes relevant to know when in the
argument distinctions arise. If the suppositional account
holds, endorsements of AC-Compatible arguments ought
to be shallow and as fast as MP endorsements while rejections of AC-Compatible arguments ought to be slower than
both.
Method
Participants
Forty-one (16 females), native French-speaking, undergraduate volunteers with no advanced mathematical background and no history of neurological or psychiatric
disorders were recruited from the Universite de Lyon 2.
Materials
Participants were presented with 48 conditional arguments involving letters of the alphabet (font type: Times
New Roman; font size: 30; color: white; background:
black). As an example, consider If there is an A then there
is a C. We purposely excluded the letters Y and W, which
require more than a single syllable when pronounced in
French and we also avoided joining letters that could have
some unintended meaning (for example, we did not use If
there is a V then there is an F because the initials VF are used
to indicate that a film has been dubbed into its version
francaise). Although 48 conditional arguments were presented to each participant, 64 problems were prepared -
16 for each of the four conditions to be described below.
The e-prime software, which ran the experiment, randomly selected 12 from each condition. The premises and
the conclusion were presented on the same single line each
time.
The experiment was designed so that any given conditional provided a Modus Ponens argument that was valid
(If there is an A then there is a C; There is an A//There is

M. Bonnefond et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 67 (2012) 468-485

a C) or not (If there is an A then there is a C; There is an A//
There is a D). These were referred to as MP-Compatible and
MP-Incompatible, respectively. Likewise, conditionals allowed for the evaluation of Affirmation of the Consequent
arguments. One was consistent with an endorsable AC
argument (If there is an A then there is a C; There is a C//
There is an A) and the other was inconsistent with it (If
there is an A then there is a C; There is a C//There is an
F). These were called AC-Compatible and AC-Incompatible,
respectively.
This design allowed us to combine conditions and increase the number of trials at critical points. For instance,
regardless of whether the second premise was part of the
AC-Compatible or AC-Incompatible condition, the paradigm was set up to record reading times of the second premise for all AC arguments. This doubled the number of
trials for AC's minor premise to 24.
Procedure
Participants were presented instructions on a computer
screen with e-prime software (Schneider, Eschman, & Zuccolotto, 2002). They were told to imagine that they were in
front of a blackboard on which one found several letters
and that their task, which was ``not very complicated,''
was to make ``little deductions with letters.'' Participants
were made to appreciate the difference between the ``logical'' and ``not-logical'' choices through two examples in
which the expression not both served as a major premise.
These were ``There is not both an M and an N; There is
an M//There is not an N'' and ``There is not both a T and
an H; There is not an H//There is a T.'' The instructions described how the optimal choice for the former was ``logical'' and how the optimal choice for the latter was ``not
logical.''
The second screen explained how the self-paced presentation worked with respect to the premises and the
conclusion. Participants were told that the sentences
would be presented one at a time and that, in order to advance the argument, they simply needed to tap the space
bar. They were told that they had to decide whether a provided conclusion was ``logically deducible'' from the premises and that there were two choices: If one thought
the conclusion logically followed ``you should click on `logical''' which was written on the left button of a two-buttoned mouse. As can be surmised, one hand rested on the
space bar and the other on the mouse (hands for space
bar and mouse were randomly assigned). The next sentence said that if the provided conclusion was not a logical
consequence of the premises, to ``click on `non-logical.'''
They were then told to expect some brief training and that
the task would include the use of a lot of ``ifs''. Overall, the
task aimed to put the participant at ease with the task.
Each line of text (whether it be a premise or conclusion)
was presented in the middle of the screen and was left-justified. Each premise was preceded by a fixation point (viz. a
cross) that ultimately lasted 600 ms (200 for the cross and
400 ms for a pause). Each conclusion was preceded by a
different form (an arrow) that ultimately lasted 1900 ms
(1500 ms for the arrow followed by a 400 ms pause). The
conclusion was then presented in bold. We included the
extra delay and the bold font for the conclusion in order

473

to distinguish it from the prior lines and to discourage participants from rushing through their evaluations. A slight
delay (400 ms) separated each problem. The training consisted of giving four arguments (one for each of the experiment's four Argument Types). However, no feedback was
provided.
Results
Here, we first describe our criteria for (a) dividing participants into groups (based on their responses to the ACCompatible arguments) and for; (b) the exclusion of data
points. We then undertake our analyses by investigating
the first-premise and by working our way down to the
conclusion.
Evaluation styles
Participants were separated into three groups based on
the way they responded to the standard AC (i.e. AC-Compatible) argument: One group consisted of 15 participants who
endorsed AC-Compatible arguments at rates that defied
chance predictions (10 or more responses of ``logical'' out
of 12). We called the members of this group Endorsers. A second group consisted of 13 participants who (normatively)
rejected the AC-Compatible argument at rates that defied
chance predictions (10 or more responses of ``Non-logical''
out of 12). The members of this group were called Rejecters.
The remaining nine participants were not sufficiently consistent to merit placement into either of these and were
called Mixed. We called these three types of reactions Evaluation Styles which then served as the basis of our analyses
between Participants. In the interest of succinctness and
space, statistical analyses focus on the Evaluation Styles of
Endorsers and Rejecters only, even though the tables include the summary statistics of all three. (Although we did
not include the Mixed group in our analyses, their latencies
- which were usually midway between those of Endorsers
and Rejecters - indicate that the reported speeds at the
two extremes appear reliable even among individuals who
were inconsistent over the course of the experiment.)
Data treatment
Four participants were excluded due to high rates of
incorrect responses to either of the Modus Ponens problems or to the remaining AC problem (two answered incorrectly to roughly half of the MP-Compatible problems, a
third participant responded incorrectly to roughly half of
the MP-Incompatible problems, and a fourth participant
answered ``logical'' to roughly half of the AC-Incompatible
problems). The remaining participants' rates of correct responses to MP-Compatible, MP-Incompatible and ACIncompatible were 98%, 98.5% and 98.5%, respectively.
Data from two participants who made 3 errors on the
AC-Incompatible problems remained in all analyses because they performed at ceiling on the MP problems.
A log transformation was applied to the reaction time
data. Responses were considered outliers if reaction times
were beyond 3 Standard Deviations (in either direction) of
the means of the Major (Conditional) Premise, the Minor
Premise or the Conclusion. This amounted to eliminating
2.9% of the original data from statistical analyses. In

474

M. Bonnefond et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 67 (2012) 468-485

Table 1
Reading times of the Endorsers, Mixed Participants and Rejecters with respect to the self-paced conditional evaluation task in Experiment 1.
Premise 1
Endorsers
Mixed
Rejecters

If P then Q
1805
2440
2542

Premise 2
Endorsers
Mixed
Rejecters
Conclusion
Endorsers
Mixed
Rejecters

P (MP)
812
875
987
Q
(MP compatible)
847
843
966

Q (AC)
854
1085
1277
R
(MP incompatible)
965
925
1131

P
(AC compatible)
835e
1000e/888r
1230r

S
(AC incompatible)
892
921
1055

Note: Endorsers are those who respond ``logical'' to AC arguments (If P then Q; Q//P) while Rejecters are those who respond ``not logical'' to them. e/r These
refer to the mean reading times for the conclusion to AC-Compatible problems among Mixed participants when they endorse (e) and when they reject (r).

addition, when analyzing the reaction time data, we removed (a) the error trials from the MP-Compatible, MPIncompatible, and AC-Incompatible control problems
(which amounted to 2% of all responses) as well as; (b)
those responses that were exceptional to either an Endorser or Rejecter response style (1.5% of the AC-Compatible
trials, which amount to 0.3% of all trials).
We now turn to our analysis as the argument unfolds. We
will first determine how response times differ at the Major
(Conditional) Premise while using the two Styles as
distinguishing categories. We will then look at performance
- based on Styles and sort of Minor premise - at the Minor
premise level to characterize response times there. Finally,
we determine how Styles and actual conclusions across
the four Arguments affect response times. Thus, analyses
become individuated more as one reaches the end of the
syllogism.
Given the materials, we carried out an analysis using
participants only (we did not include item analyses because one would expect effects due to letters to generalize). For reaction times, partial eta-squared are reported.
Following Cohen (1988), effect sizes above .20 reflect a
small effect, effect sizes above .50 reflect a medium one,
and effect sizes above .80 reflect a large one.
The major conditional premise
The first set of three rows of Table 1 shows the response
time of the Major (Conditional) Premise reconverted from
its mean natural log, as a function of three groups based
on their Evaluation-styles (Endorsers, Mixed-Participants
and Rejecters). One can see that the Endorsers processed
the first premise rather fast and faster than the participants
with the other styles. As we indicated above, and in order to
make the sort of comparisons that traditionally concern the
literature, we compared just two sorts of Style (the Endorsers and the Rejecters). A reliable difference was observed (ttest, t(26) = 2.07, p < .05), with Rejecters taking longer than
Endorsers. Thus, one can see that the different Styles in
approaching AC-Compatible Arguments can reveal different approaches to Conditional problems from the start.
The minor premise
The second set of three rows in Table 1 shows the response times of Premise 2 reconverted from the natural

logs as a function of three groups and the Minor Premise
(AC vs. MP) presented. One can see that Endorsers processed the second premise rather fast and faster than participants with the other styles. Moreover, as can be seen,
the difference between MP and AC minor premises grows
as one compares Endorsers, Mixed and Rejecter styles.
We compared two levels (AC and MP) of the Minor Premise as a within-subject factor with the two sorts of Style
(Endorsers and the Rejecters) as part of a between-subjects
comparison. A reliable difference was observed in terms of
Minor Premise (F(1, 26) = 55.86, p < .001, g2 = 0.682) and
Style (F(1, 26) = 4.74, p < .05, g2 = 0.154) with AC Minor
Premises prompting slower reaction times than MP minor
premises and with Rejecters taking longer than Endorsers.
The interaction between Style and Argument Type was also
reliable (F(1, 26) = 14.13; p < .001, g2 = 0.352).
The conclusion(s)
The third set of rows in Table 1 shows the response time
converted from the natural logs of the conclusion as a function of Style and the four possible problem types. As can be
seen, the Rejecters took longest and the valid MP-Compatible problems prompted the fastest responses. These
observations were largely verified by running an ANOVA
with Log(reaction time) as the dependent variable, Style
(Endorser or Rejecter) as a between-subject factor and
Argument Type (MP-Compatible, AC-Compatible, MPIncompatible, AC-Incompatible) as a within-subject factor.
The main effect for Style was significant (F(1, 26) = 5.32,
p < .05, g2 = 0.170). Argument Type, too, produced significant effects (F(3, 78) = 4.18, p < .01, g2 = 0.138). The interaction between Style and Argument Type was reliable
(F(3, 78) = 2.86; p < .05, g2 = 0.099).
Post hoc analyses on the interactions showed that the
Rejecters were very largely responsible for these interactions. Their slow evaluations of AC-Compatible problems
were significantly slower than those to five of the seven
other Style-Argument Type combinations (all p's < .001),
the exceptions being their own treatment of the MPIncompatible and the AC-Incompatible conclusions. Likewise, the Rejecters' treatment of the MP-Incompatible conclusions took significantly longer than the reaction times
to four other Style-Argument Type combinations (all
p's < .05), the exceptions being the Rejecters treatment of

M. Bonnefond et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 67 (2012) 468-485

the AC-Compatible and the AC-Incompatible problems and
the Endorsers' treatment of the MP-Incompatible problem.
Finally, the Rejecters' treatment of the AC-Incompatible
conclusions was slower than the Endorsers' MP- and ACCompatible conclusions (all p's < .001).
Discussion
This study aimed to investigate how participants respond to MP and AC arguments in a step-by-step manner.
We were most interested in the AC-Compatible arguments,
which can lead to judgments of ``logical'' or ``not-logical,''
but we also included cases of MP-Compatible, AC-Incompatible and MP-Incompatible arguments, to serve as controls. From the prior literature, we expected to find two
groups - and thus reaction-time differences - between
those who generally endorse AC-Compatible arguments
and those who do not, i.e. Endorsers and Rejecters. This
came to fruition.
These two groups differed in intriguing ways and as
soon as the first premise appeared; overall, Endorsers read
each of the premises faster than the Rejecters. Endorsers
also reacted more quickly to the AC-Compatible conclusion
than Rejecters did. This points to the likelihood that
Endorsers do not read the lines of texts in a profound manner. In the meantime, the data indicate that Rejecters appear to be making an effort to guard against the logically
invalid argument throughout the syllogism. This demonstrates that the Rejecters are (1) paying attention to all four
arguments forms and that they are; (2) not reacting in a
kind of metalinguistic way that would allow them to expend less effort. That is, one could imagine Rejecters coming up with a simpler way of responding since they are
essentially responding ``logical'' to one event - the MPCompatible case - and ``not logical'' otherwise. Yet, they
do not seem to be employing a strategy that simply anticipates hitting the ``not logical'' button as soon as they see
the Minor Premise indicating AC. The upshot is that the
data indicate that Rejecters maintain their engagement in
the task throughout, yielding the longest response times
to the Minor Premises for AC and, with the exception of
the valid MP-Compatible problem, to all of the conclusions.
Regardless of the relative speeds among the two styles
analyzed, which are based on AC-Compatible arguments,
participants as a whole read the minor premises from MP
arguments faster than the minor premises from AC arguments. Importantly, even as Endorsers appear to be reading the syllogisms in a fast and arguably superficial
manner, analyses of their reaction times indicate that they
do notice the difference between the AC minor premise
and the MP minor premise by slowing down for the former.
This confirms Barrouillet et al.'s (2000) analysis, which
essentially consisted of Endorsers only. However, the difference between participants' treatment of the AC Minor
Premise and the MP Minor premise does not end there.
Interestingly, one finds that as the response-time difference between the AC's and MP's Minor Premise increases
so does the likelihood that a participant will reject the
AC-Compatible conclusion.
Reactions to the conclusion were also revealing. While
all participants processed the conclusion from the

475

MP-Compatible problem quickly they processed the conclusion from the MP-Incompatible problem significantly
more slowly. This indicates that MP is indeed privileged
in some particular way. As anticipated, speed based on
Style varied as a function of the AC-Compatible problem.
In the meantime, the Endorsers evaluated the conclusions
of AC-Compatible problems about as fast as the MP-Compatible problem, which corresponds with many intuitions
about AC processing in the literature.
As we indicated earlier, the response times of the Mixed
Participants fell on a continuum that stretches between
Endorsers and Rejecters, as one would expect by their very
nature. That is, the data from the Mixed participants do not
reflect an exceptional strategy since their response times
to the Major Premise, the Minor premise and the conclusions in the AC-Compatible problems are generally midway between the Endorsers and the Rejecters. These data
indicate indirectly that endorsements of AC-Compatible
argument provide the fastest processing and rejections
the slowest even among individuals who provide both
sorts of response.

Experiment 2
When one group of participants prompts longer reaction times compared to another, one can conclude that
the slower participants are engaged in extra processing.
However, this result does not allow one to make inferences
about the nature of the extra effort. In order to better characterize the protracted processes, we now transform our
paradigm slightly in order to employ EEG. This technique,
which provides high temporal resolution, has proved itself
valuable at characterizing qualitative aspects of processing. This could provide us with a useful tool as we distinguish between the processing of AC and MP. Here, we
analyze evoked related potentials (ERPs) as participants
process the minor premise and conclusion of multiple conditional arguments. ERPs reflect the activity of neural populations in response to stimulation and are characterized
by positive or negative deflections which are compared
to a baseline activity. ERP components have been associated with a variety of perceptual and cognitive processes.
In Experiment 2, we focus on the components known as
N2 (or N200) and P3b (or P300b), which have been related,
respectively, to the violation and to the satisfaction of
expectations (for a review, see Folstein & Van Petten,
2008; Picton, 1992). The former is a frontal negative deflection observed between 200 ms and 300 ms after stimulus
onset and the latter is a centroparietal positive deflection
observed in the 250-450 ms time window. The P3b is usually distinguished from the P3a which shows a more frontal topography and which is elicited by infrequent stimuli.
In working memory tasks, in which participants have to
decide whether a stimulus S2 is similar to a previous stimulus S1, a mismatching S2 elicits an N2 while a matching
S2 elicits a P3b (Wang, Wang, Cui, Tian, & Zhang, 2002;
Zhang, Wang, Li, & Wang, 2003). Similarly, in deductive
reasoning tasks, a minor premise that is unrelated to the
antecedent and consequent of the conditional statement
(i.e. If P then Q; U) yields an N2 while a minor premise that

476

M. Bonnefond et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 67 (2012) 468-485

matches the antecedent yields a P3b (i.e. If P then Q; P; see
Bonnefond & Van der Henst, 2009).
We also briefly describe a third component whose presence made itself known in our findings in a limited way,
viz. the positive slow wave (PSW). Although there is no
general interpretational consensus concerning it (as there
is for the N2 and P3b), this component appears linked to
sustained attention (Gevins et al., 1996) or, more specifically, to cases where a participant needs to recognize that
a stimulus has the potential to be the basis of further processing. For example, Honda et al. (1996) describe an
experiment in which participants were required to determine whether a sequence of two stimuli (having a 2 s
interval between them) matched previously learned material. The authors reported a PSW-like component when the
first stimulus of the two had the makings of a potential
match (for more discussion, see Bonnefond & Van der
Henst, 2009, pp. 3131-3132).
Based on our findings in the behavioral study of Experiment 1, we still expect to have Endorsers and Rejecters.
However, we ask slightly different questions, which are
the following: Are MP minor premises faster because they
are more greatly anticipated than AC Minor Premises, i.e.,
will the minor premises from MP provide P3b components
with higher peaks than AC, indicating greater anticipation
of MP minor premises over AC Minor Premises? Will the
evidence suggest that AC Minor Premises are actually
unanticipated, as an N2 would indicate, at least for the
Rejecters? As indicated in the Introduction, all of the seminal accounts would predict comparable P3b's for both the
MP and AC minor premise. Meanwhile, Barrouillet et al.'s
(2000) directionality account would arguably predict a
greater P3b amplitude for MP's minor premise than for
AC's. Our account, on the other hand, expects to find an
N2 for AC minor premises across all participants because
anything other than the conditional's antecedent in that
slot would be a violation of an expectation.
Experiment 2 is practically identical to Experiment 1
except that the EEG paradigm compels us to be as stringent
as possible with participants' time and does not give us the
opportunity to register reaction times (because each of the
premises is presented for a set amount of time and because
responses to conclusions are requested well after they appear in order to reduce noise). In line with the above, all
four modifications listed below are designed to save time
or to come up with a clean signal. Compared to the paradigm of Experiment 1, we (a) increase the number of trials,
(b) reduce wordiness (e.g., If there is an A then there is a C
becomes If A then C and There is an A becomes A) so that
participants read while keeping eye movements to a minimum, (c) remove the self-paced feature, and; (d) add filler
items. We will also focus exclusively on Endorsers and
Rejecters (i.e., we will not be concerned with Mixed
responders at all).
Method
Participants
Forty-six native French-speaking undergraduate volunteers (of which 28 were female) with no advanced mathematical background and no history of neurological or

psychiatric disorders were recruited from the Universite
de Lyon 2. All subjects were right-handed as measured
by the Edinburg Handedness Inventory.
Material and design
Participants were presented with 174 conditional arguments involving letters of the alphabet. As an example,
consider If A then C (Si A alors C), where A refers to the antecedent and C the consequent. The letters were chosen
using the same criteria as those in Experiment 1. Moreover,
as in Experiment 1, Experiment 2 followed a 2 (Minor premise: MP's vs. AC's) by 2 (Conclusion: Compatible vs.
Incompatible) design. This experiment also included 30 filler trials that used letters in the minor premise that were
unmentioned in the conditional, as in (If A then C; U//S).
This set of trials was designed to prevent participants from
expecting minor premises from MP and AC arguments only
and their number was determined by considerations of
experiment duration (i.e., we did not want to unnecessarily
lengthen the experiment). There were two response keys
corresponding to the two possible evaluations one could
give to a conclusion, ``logical'' and ``non-logical''. The font
and sizes of the text were the same as Experiment 1's.
Procedure
The experiment was presented on a computer screen
with Presentation 10.2 software (Neurobehavioral Systems, http://www.neurobs.com/). In the instruction set,
participants were informed about the two response options before being given an example of each sort of argument that they would encounter during the experiment.
All trials consisted of a Major (Conditional) Premise, a Minor Premise and a Conclusion. A visual signal (a cross), presented in the center of the screen for 800 ms, preceded
each. The first, conditional premise remained on the screen
for 1300 ms while the minor premise and conclusion remained for 800 ms each. The phrase ``your response''
which appeared 800 ms after the arrival of the conclusion,
was the signal to participants to provide their evaluation.
Participants thus had 2100 ms to process the conditional premise (1300 ms for the presentation time of the
conditional premise and 800 ms for the fixation period
prior to receiving the minor premise). We arrived at this
presentation rate, which is midway between the durations
reported for Endorsers and Rejecters in Experiment 1, under the assumption that it actually overestimates the time
needed to react. This assumption is based on the fact that
(a) the physical length of the conditional premise in this
Experiment was much shorter than the one in Experiment
1 and consequently required less time to process (whereas
Experiment 1 presented the conditional with 21 letters, as
in S'il y a un A alors il y a un B, the conditional premise in
Experiment 2 had 9, as in Si A alors B) and that; (b) the
presentation in Experiment 2 did not call for a motor response after the conditional premise and so it required less
time to go to the next premise (unlike Experiment 1's selfpaced task which called for a motor response each time). In
any case, our main goal was to reliably produce Rejecters
and Endorsers and a pilot experiment with 12 participants
with the above-described procedure did not significantly

M. Bonnefond et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 67 (2012) 468-485

transform our expected proportions (i.e. the pilot yielded 5
Rejecters and 7 Endorsers, which was not dissimilar from
the 13 rejecters and 15 endorsers reported in Experiment
1).
Participants performed the Experiment in three blocks.
Trial order within each block was randomized and the
block order within each task was counterbalanced across
participants. Participants were instructed to make neither
eye movements nor vocal articulations (audible or inaudible) during the trial. Participants were instructed to respond as quickly and as accurately as possible. The task
began with 10 training trials whose data were not included
in further analyses.
Participants who endorsed the AC argument at rates
that defied chance predictions were considered Endorsers
(which amounted to 17 participants before further data
analysis) and those who generally rejected the argument
were considered Rejecters (which amounted to 23 participants before further data analysis). Six other participants
were excluded from the analyses due to inconsistent responses to the AC argument (those who were referred to
as Mixed earlier) and five were eliminated because their
EEG signal was replete with artifacts linked to excessive
eye movements. This left us with 19 Rejecters and 15
Endorsers. At this point, four participants were randomly
removed from the Rejecter group in order to arrive at a
comparable number of participants in both groups (15
Rejecters and 15 Endorsers).
Electroencephalogram (EEG) recording
Subjects were seated in a dimly lit, electrically shielded,
sound-attenuating chamber. EEG was recorded with a 64
channel NetAmps.200 system (Electrical Geodesics Inc).
Amplified analogue voltages (0.1-200 Hz bandpass) were
sampled at 500 Hz. Electrode impedance was kept below
40 kX. During recording, all channels were referenced to
Cz; once off-line, they were re-referenced to the average
of the mastoids. ERP analyses were conducted using
ELAN-Pack software developed at INSERM U821 (Lyon,
France). They consisted in averaging the EEG segments in
synchronization with the onset of (a) the minor premise
and then; (b) the conclusion in each condition over a
800 ms period including a 100 ms pre-stimulus interval.
The signals were low-pass filtered (20 Hz) and a baseline
correction was calculated from the 100 ms preceding the
presentation of the letter in each condition. Trials contaminated by eye blinks or eye movements (threshold:
100 lV) were not included in the analyses.
Data analysis
We computed the mean value of the signal in a 60 ms
time-window centered around the peak of each of the analyzed components. Importantly, to overcome effects that
could be due to the influence of previous components,
we corrected the signal so that the first value of the window is set to zero. As we explain later, however, there is
one exception concerning the unanticipated PSW (and uniquely for Rejecters) where we discovered that the wave
sustains itself, i.e., it appears to last from 340 to 600 ms
after stimulus onset. For that case only, we adopt this

477

longer time-window to make comparisons between MP
and AC arguments.
Each analysis was run with the same electrode positions. Twelve representative sites of the 10-20 system
were chosen to cover the scalp in a Cartesian manner
(frontal: F3, Fz and F4; central: C3, Cz and C4; centro-parietal: CP3, CPz and CP4 and parietal: P3, Pz and P4). We ran
multiple ANOVAs using repeated measures based on Conditions (defined for each analysis) and based on two levels
of Electrode Site as within-subject factors: Laterality (Left,
Midline and Right) and Anterior-Posterior location (Frontal, Central, Centro-parietal, Parietal). Between-subject
analyses were determined by the participants' general profile as Rejecter or Endorser; these analyses were restricted
to trials on which subjects made the expected responses.
Relevant post hoc comparisons were computed with Tukey
HSD tests.
Results
In what follows, we present the results of the components, N2, P3b and the PSW, i.e. in the order that these
components make themselves known. Also, we begin our
analysis with the Minor Premise before turning to the Conclusion. We consider the findings concerning the Minor
Premise to be fundamental because (a) they provide insights into the processing of the conditional statement
which immediately precedes it and because (b) reactions
to the two sorts of (AC and MP) arguments can first be distinguished at this point. Furthermore, participants' processing of the conclusion obviously depends on their
reactions to the Minor Premise that precedes it.
Minor premise
N2 component
As shown in Figs. 1 and 2, the amplitude of the frontocentral N2 (230-290 ms) was greater in the AC condition
than in the MP condition for both the Rejecters and the
Endorsers. However, the difference between the two was
larger among the Rejecters than it was among the
Endorsers.
We analyzed the effect of Argument by comparing the
minor premise from MP to that of AC. We entered the
mean value obtained in the N2 window into a four-way
ANOVA with Argument type (MP vs. AC), Laterality and
Anterior-Posterior location as within-subject factors and
Style (Rejecters vs. Endorsers) as a between-subject factor.
This analysis revealed main effects of Anterior-Posterior
location (F(3, 84) = 17.97, p < .001, g2 = 0.4), Laterality
(F(2, 56) = 19.06, p < .001, g2 = 0.41) and a significant interaction between these two factors (F(6, 168) = 10.8, p < .001,
g2 = 0.31). It also revealed a significant interaction between
these factors and Style (F(6, 168) = 2.37, p < .05, g2 = 0.18),
between Anterior-Posterior location and the Argument
type (F(3, 84) = 4.53, p < .01, g2 = 0.21) and between the
four factors (F(6, 168) = 2.21, p < .05, g2 = 0.14).
Post hoc tests revealed that the N2's amplitude was
greater in the AC condition than it was in the MP condition
in the midline and left frontal electrodes (p < .01 and
p < .05 respectively) among the Endorsers while it was

478

M. Bonnefond et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 67 (2012) 468-485

Fig. 1. Endorsers. Stimulus locked grand-average waveforms evoked by the appearance of the letter representing the Minor Premise of the MP (black line)
and AC (gray line) conditions across the 12 sites of interest. Left electrodes are shown in the left column, midline electrodes in the middle column, and right
electrodes in the right column. The components of interest are shown with an arrow and only for those electrodes yielding statistically significant effects.

greater in the frontal area (p < .001 on the three electrodes)
and in the midline and right central and centroparietal
electrodes (p < .001 for each) for the Rejecters. Also, while
the N2 component was more negative for AC arguments
over MP arguments for all participants, the MP condition
for Endorser participants prompted a more negative N2
than for Rejecters (p < .05). We will discuss this last result
in the Discussion.
P3b component
Visual inspection of Figs. 1 and 2 revealed a larger amplitude of the centroparietal P3b component (270-330 ms) for
the MP condition than for the AC condition for both Styles.
The difference between the two types of Minor Premise was
larger among the Rejecters. We carried out a four-way ANOVA with Argument type, Anterior-Posterior location and

Laterality as within-subject factors and Style as a between-subject factor for the value of the amplitude of the
P3b component. We found a main effect of Anterior-Posterior location (F(3, 84) = 20.06, p < .001, g2 = 0.42) as well as
for Argument type (F(1, 28) = 10.7, p < .01, g2 = 0.28). We
also found a significant interaction between these two factors (F(3, 84) = 14.67, p < .001, g2 = 0.34) as well as between
Anterior-Posterior location and Laterality (F(6, 168) = 3.01,
p < .01, g2 = 0.19). The ANOVA also revealed a significant
interaction between Anterior-Posterior location, Argument
type and Style (F(3, 84) = 2.53, p < .05, g2 = 0.12).
Post hoc tests showed that the P3b's amplitude was larger in the MP condition for Rejecters than for Endorsers
(p < .05). The two groups also differed with respect to
location. Among the Rejecters, the MP condition prompted
a larger P3b (with respect to the AC condition) in the

M. Bonnefond et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 67 (2012) 468-485

479

Fig. 2. Rejecters. Stimulus locked grand-average waveforms evoked by the appearance of the letter representing the Minor Premise of the MP (black line)
and AC (gray line) conditions across the 12 sites of interest. Left electrodes are shown in the left column, midline electrodes in the middle column, and right
electrodes in the right column. The components of interest are shown with an arrow or a brace and only for those electrodes yielding statistically significant
effects.

centroparietal and parietal sites (p < .001 for both sites);
for the Endorsers, the P3b for the MP condition was larger
than the one in the AC condition in the parietal site
(p < .01).
Supplementary results concerning the minor premise
Although it was not at the center of our interests when
we began this study, we would be remiss not to mention a
centroparietal positive wave that followed the P3b and
that can be seen in Figs. 1 and 2. This is the component that
resembles a PSW. Interestingly, this wave expressed itself
differently for the two Styles. For the Endorsers (in
Fig. 1), the PSW appeared to be similar for both conditions,
except that its amplitude was larger in the AC condition
than in the MP condition. For the Rejecters, the PSW had
a characteristically different form in the AC condition

when compared to the MP condition (and to the Endorsers'
MP and AC conditions). Given that the positive wave in the
Rejecters' condition was so characteristically different (and
specifically with respect to its time window), we inspected
the PSW among the Endorsers and Rejecters separately and
while using different time windows.
We first computed a three-way ANOVA among Endorsers with repeated measures on Argument type (MP vs. AC),
Anterior-Posterior location and Laterality while using the
340-400 ms time-window. This analysis revealed a main
effect of Argument type (F(1, 14) = 6.61, p < .05, g2 = 0.33)
and of Anterior-Posterior location (F(3, 42) = 23.26),
p < .001, g2 = 0.62). It also showed a significant interaction
between Anterior-Posterior location and Laterality
(F(6, 84) = 3.42, p < .01, g2 = 0.22) and between these two
factors and Argument type (F(6, 84) = 4.16, p < .001,

480

M. Bonnefond et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 67 (2012) 468-485

g2 = 0.23). Post hoc tests showed that this last effect resulted from a larger PSW component in the AC condition
in the right and midline centroparietal and parietal electrodes (p < .001 for each electrode except the right parietal
electrode which was p < .01).
We then computed a three-way ANOVA among Rejecters with repeated measures on Argument type (MP vs. AC),
Anterior-Posterior location as well as Laterality and while
using the 340-600 ms time-window. This analysis revealed a main effect of Argument type (F(1, 14) = 7.61,
p < .01, g2 = 0.52) and of Anterior-Posterior location
(F(3, 42) = 30.42), p < .001, g2 = 0.65). It showed a significant interaction between Argument type and Anterior-
Posterior location (F(3, 84) = 12.21, p < .001, g2 = 0.26). Post
hoc tests showed that this interaction resulted from a larger slow component in the AC condition in the centroparietal and parietal electrodes (p < .001 for each electrode).
Presentation of conclusion
N2 component
Visual inspection of Fig. 3 shows that, among the
Endorsers, the frontocentral N2 (230-290 ms) appeared
not to differ between the MP-Compatible-conclusion condition and the AC-Compatible-conclusion condition. The
inspection of Fig. 4, on the other hand, reveals that Rejecters produce a larger frontocentral N2 component for the
conclusion in the AC-Compatible condition compared to
the conclusion in the MP-Compatible condition.
We computed a four-way ANOVA using the amplitude
of the N2 component as the dependent measure, with
Argument type (MP-Compatible vs. AC-Compatible), Laterality and Anterior-Posterior location as repeated measures
and with Style as a between-subject factor. This analysis
revealed a main effect of Anterior-Posterior location
(F(3, 84) = 37.26, p < .001, g2 = 0.57) and Laterality
(F(2, 56) = 16.68, p < .001, g2 = 0.37). It also showed a significant interaction between Anterior-Posterior location
and Laterality (F(6, 168) = 9.89, p < .001, g2 = 0.26), between Anterior-Posterior location and Argument type
(F(3, 84) = 3.68, p < .01, g2 = 0.23) and between Anterior-
Posterior location, Argument type and Style (F(3, 84) = 3.5,
p < .01, g2 = 0.22). Post hoc tests revealed that - for the
Rejecters - the N2 was larger in the AC-Compatible condition than in the MP-Compatible condition in the frontal
area only (p < .001).
P3b component
As shown in Figs. 3 and 4, the centroparietal P3b component (270-330 ms) prompted by the MP-Compatible
condition was comparable to the one prompted by the
AC-Compatible condition among the Endorsers; however,
we found a difference between the two conditions among
the Rejecters. We entered the mean value obtained in the
P3b window into a four-way ANOVA with Argument type
(MP-Compatible vs. AC-Compatible), Laterality and Anterior-Posterior location as within-subject factors and Style
as a between-subject factor. This analysis revealed a main
effect of Anterior-Posterior location (F(3, 84) = 90.39,
p < .001, g2 = 0.76), Laterality (F(2, 56) = 15.79, p < .001,
g2 = 0.36), and Argument type (F(1, 28) = 4.73, p < .01,

g2 = 0.14). We also observed a significant interaction
between Anterior-Posterior location and Laterality
(F(6, 168) = 6.63, p < .001, g2 = 0.19) and between Anterior-Posterior location, Argument type and Style (F(3, 84)
= 3.51, p < .01, g2 = 0.23). Post hoc tests revealed that the
last interaction resulted from a larger P3b component in
the MP-Compatible condition when compared to the ACCompatible condition in the centroparietal and parietal
electrodes (p < .001) among Rejecters only.
Discussion
Experiment 2 used the same paradigm as Experiment
1's, but adapted it in order to collect EEG measures. Mean
while, we focused exclusively on those participants who
were either Endorsers or Rejecters of the AC-Compatible
problem. The results confirmed the main findings in Experiment 1 while the subtle measures of EEG revealed much
more.
As in Experiment 1, an AC argument's minor premise
prompted a universal reaction when compared to the minor premise of MP. As can be seen through the N2, all participants reacted as if the AC's minor premise was
unexpected. That is, we found a prominent N2 among,
not only Rejecters but, Endorsers. This result is noteworthy
because it is not as if we found a P3b of lower magnitude
(the wave that commonly arises with the arrival of the
MP minor premise), but an indication that the AC minor
premise is disruptive even among those who ultimately responded in a ``shallow'' way. Experiment 2 indicated that
the N2 effect related to the AC's minor premise was even
more pronounced among Rejecters when they were compared to Endorsers.
Given how N2's are consistently linked with AC arguments' minor premises (when compared to those from
MP arguments), it appears that one can claim that these
minor premises are generally unexpected. However, one
other reported result - that MP's minor premise prompted
a more negative N2 among Endorsers than among Rejecters - shows that this claim calls for some nuance. It appears that Rejecters, who arguably process the
conditional more deeply than anyone else, elicit fewer conflicting signals than Endorsers do when they encounter the
minor premise of MP. This makes sense to the extent that
Rejecters are focused almost exclusively on MP arguments
(as can be seen in the greater magnitude of their P3b's
when compared to the Endorsers and discussed below)
and so the arrival of this argument is not the source of a
conflict. Another way to view this is that (while Endorsers
show that minor premises for AC are generally unexpected
when compared to those of MP) the arrival of the minor
premise of MP arguments is still less expected among
Endorsers than it is among Rejecters. Endorsers' reactions
arguably indicate that they take into account the likelihood
of confronting an AC argument more than Rejecters do.
This would make the arrival of a MP minor premise appear
relatively more surprising for an Endorser than for a
Rejecter.
As far as the P3b is concerned, we found that its magnitude was greater with the arrival of the MP's minor premise when compared to the AC's and for both groups of

M. Bonnefond et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 67 (2012) 468-485

481

Fig. 3. Endorsers. Stimulus locked grand-average waveforms evoked by the appearance of the letter representing the conclusion of the MP-Compatible
(dashed dark line) and AC-Compatible (dashed gray line) conditions across the 12 sites of interest. Left electrodes are shown in the left column, midline
electrodes in the middle column, and right electrodes in the right column. Comparisons yielded no significant differences between the two conditions.

participants. The Rejecters also provided a larger P3b for
MP than Endorsers did and arguably because they were
specifically waiting for MP's minor premise. Taking the results from both the AC and MP arguments together, the
Rejecters appear to be treating the Minor Premise more
deeply.
Both Endorsers and Rejecters showed late positive components but with different characteristics. For Endorsers,
the positive slow wave observed for AC was similar to that
observed for MP but showed greater amplitude. We previously associated this component with inferential effort
(Bonnefond & Van der Henst, 2009). Given that AC's minor
premise is generally less expected and requires more time
to be processed than MP's (see Experiment 1), it most
likely requires extra inferential effort when it does arise;

this supplemental effort can be revealed by the PSW. The
Rejecters' late positive component was much longer (i.e.
it peaks at 450 ms) and had a different shape than the
Endorsers'. Given that it arose for participants who considered AC arguments to be logically invalid, this late positive
component could be viewed as a P600, which is often considered to be a reflection of a violation in a rule-governed
structure (Nunez-Pena & Honrubia-Serrano, 2004; Patel,
Gibson, Ratner, Besson, & Holcomb, 1998). Indeed, this
component has been reported with respect to violations
of (a) various syntactic structures (see Friederici, Hahne,
and Saddy (2002) for a review), (b) harmonic musical
arrangements (Besson & Faita, 1995; Patel et al., 1998),
(c) arithmetic progressions (Nunez-Pena & HonrubiaSerrano, 2004) as well as; (d) abstract sequences (Lelekov,

482

M. Bonnefond et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 67 (2012) 468-485

Fig. 4. Rejecters. Stimulus locked grand-average waveforms evoked by the appearance of the letter representing the conclusion of the MP-Compatible
(dashed black line) and AC-Compatible (dashed gray line) conditions across the 12 sites of interest. Left electrodes are shown in the left column, midline
electrodes in the middle column, and right electrodes in the right column. The components of interest are shown with an arrow and only for those
electrodes yielding statistically significant effects.

Dominey, & Garcia-Larrea, 2000). The Rejecters' PSW
(which, again, is akin to a P600) could thus be viewed as
an indication that the AC's minor premise cannot be integrated into a logical conditional sequence.
Participants reacted to the conclusions in Experiment 2
in a way that is similar to the participants' reactions in
Experiment 1. On the one hand, Endorsers evaluated MPCompatible and AC-Compatible conclusions in comparable
ways so that by the time the conclusion arose, the ACCompatible problem was treated as being as valid as the
MP-Compatible problem. This is akin to the relative lack
of response time differences reported among Endorsers in
Experiment 1 when they were evaluating the conclusions

of AC-Compatible and MP-Compatible arguments. On the
other hand, the AC-Compatible arguments prompted
stronger reactions among the Rejecters, who produced
N2's to the AC-Compatible conclusion when compared to
the MP-Compatible conclusion. These data correspond
with the substantial response time differences among
Rejecters when they were evaluating AC-Compatible and
MP-Compatible arguments in Experiment 1.
Overall, the results from this experiment confirm that,
in the wake of a conditional premise, there is a general
expectation that the Minor Premise will be the conditional's antecedent so that MP can be carried out. When
the conditional's consequent arrives in its place - for a

M. Bonnefond et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 67 (2012) 468-485

potential AC argument - it is registered as unanticipated
for everyone, even though this Minor Premise arises nearly
half the time. With respect to the conclusion, Endorsers
handle MP-Compatible and AC-Compatible arguments in
a way that make the two appear similar; however, Rejecters maintain a stance that prevents them from doing so.

General discussion
We began this paper by pointing out that there is universal agreement - across two largely separate literatures -
that AC arguments are endorsed routinely and in a way
resembling Modus Ponens, even if explanations from these
literatures differ. For linguistically oriented investigators,
AC-Endorsements result when the conditional is enriched
in some way to become a biconditional (Braine & O'Brien,
1991; Horn, 2000). For those in the Mental Model tradition,
Endorsed AC arguments are represented and manipulated in
a way that is highly similar to MP (Barrouillet et al., 2000;
Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1991). For those inspired by dualprocess accounts, endorsements of AC arguments reflect
superficial processing and to the point that participants
ignore the conditional's inferential value (Evans et al., 2007).
The thorn in the side of this general view are data (from
Barrouillet et al., 2000) showing that AC arguments, when
endorsed, prompt slowdowns linked (potentially) to the
presentation of the Minor Premise in traditionally-ordered
syllogisms. These data are challenging for two reasons.
First, there is an earlier on-line study (Marcus & Rips,
1979) showing that endorsed AC and MP arguments require comparable amounts of time (when an entire syllogism is presented). So, one issue going into the present
investigation was essentially the following: Which results
- Marcus and Rips's (1979) or Barrouillet et al.'s (2000) -
are replicable? Second, if Barrouillet et al.'s (2000) data
were indeed to be confirmed, their account for the AC-related delay would need further elucidation because it proposes that endorsements of MP and AC arguments are
essentially equivalent (as per a Mental Model account)
and this would be hard to square with the reported slowdowns that distinguish AC from MP. They argue that the
difference arises because AC's minor premise is just
slightly less preferred than MP's, at least when conditionals are presented as if-then.
In contrast, we propose that AC arguments are categorically different from MP because a conditional such as if-
then raises expectations about the conditional's antecedent
and that anything else, including a Minor Premise concerning the conditional's consequent, would be the source of
slowdowns. According to our view, a processing delay
linked to AC's minor premise is an indication that a participant's raised expectations - brought on by the conditional
premise - have been dashed. We also argue that time, as
recorded by a self-paced task, could serve as an indicator
of the extent to which expectations are raised; specifically,
the more time a participant devotes to AC's (unexpected)
Minor Premise the more likely it is that she will ultimately
reject the argument.
Two experiments were conducted to resolve (a) the replication question and (b) the debate raised above. Both

483

experiments used on-line measures as traditional AC and
MP arguments unfolded. Experiment 1 used a self-paced
task, which showed that the endorsement rates and response times to conclusions were not exceptional. Like in
Marcus and Rips (1979), the results from Experiment 1
showed that rejected AC-Compatible arguments took longer to process than endorsed AC-Compatible arguments.
Unlike Marcus and Rips (1979), but in line with Barrouillet
et al. (2000), the results showed that the minor premise in
AC-Compatible arguments consistently prompted a delay
when compared to the minor premises of MP arguments.
Thus, slowdowns were not limited to Rejecters. Also, a participant's latency with respect to the AC's minor premise
was practically an indicator of the likelihood that she
would ultimately reject the AC argument.
While aiming to better characterize these findings,
Experiment 2 transformed the paradigm slightly in order
to employ EEG methodology. The results were revealing
on three counts. First, both Endorsers and Rejecters of AC
arguments showed evidence of an N2 with the presentation of the minor premise, thus providing us with a more
substantial explanation for the AC-related slowdowns reported in Experiment 1. Second, MP's minor premise
prompted a P3b having a greater magnitude than the one
for AC for both Endorsers and Rejecters. Finally, with respect to MP's minor premise, the P3b component was of
greater magnitude among Rejecters than among Endorsers.
How to account for the AC data
The breadth of original data collected here represents a
major challenge to the consensus we described earlier.
Here we detail how. If the linguistic-pragmatic view were
correct, one would find the processing of minor premises
in AC Endorsements resembling those in MP. But we do
not. One finds reaction times to minor premises that slow
down consistently in AC arguments with respect to MP
arguments regardless of a participant's evaluation later.
Moreover, one finds N2's universally in reaction to AC minor premises. It is important to remember, too, that AC arguments were presented in half (or nearly half) the trials,
which means that the paradigm provided participants with
every opportunity to habituate and this did not occur.
If the Mental Model view were correct, the same expectations as above would follow. If one accepts the arguments that lead to the revised Mental Model account
from Barrouillet et al. (2000), one might point to the P3b
of lower magnitude for minor premises linked to AC
Endorsements when compared to MP (Endorsements).
However, no Mental Model approach would predict the
universal N2's that are linked to the AC's minor premises
as we reported here.
The one account in the literature that best handles our
data comes from Evans's dual-systems-inspired suppositional theory. Evans et al. (e.g., 2007) view endorsed AC
arguments as an indication of shallow processing of the
major premise and view rejected AC arguments as an indication of deeper processing. It can thus account for (1) the
Endorsers' shorter response times when compared to those
of Rejecters with respect to the AC's minor premise; (2) the
interaction showing a greater N2 component associated

484

M. Bonnefond et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 67 (2012) 468-485

with the AC's minor premise among Rejecters when compared to Endorsers (since this minor premise is unexpected
and specifically for this deep-processing group). However,
the suppositional theory would not anticipate the AC's
minor premise to prompt supplementary processing on
the part of all participants, i.e. regardless of one's style,
when compared to MP. That is, the theory would expect
participants who end up endorsing AC arguments to do
so in a manner that is identical to MP endorsements from
the beginning of the syllogism onward. However, even
Endorsers notice the difference between AC and MP arguments and as soon as the minor premise.
We now return to our own account, which is that participants - from the moment that the major premise is presented - expect the conditional's antecedent to arrive as
part of the minor premise. When that does not occur at
the appointed time, participants note that an expectation
has been violated. The universal slowdowns (Experiment
1) and the universal N2's (Experiment 2) are due to the fact
that the arrival of the AC argument's minor premise is not
expected. Such data imply that endorsements of AC arguments resemble post hoc justifications in the wake of the
violation rather than implicit acceptances akin to MP processing. Post hoc justifications could be that the antecedent and the consequent go together or perhaps that the
presence of the consequent is a ``good-enough'' argument
for the presence of the antecedent.
We take our data to indicate that all participants take
heed of a naturally occurring signal linked to if-then which
raises expectations about what is imminently available.
These represent low-level pragmatic processes that are required in order to make the conditional meaningful. Without the expected minor premise, the conditional is as
meaningless as a pronoun without a referent. However,
the pragmatic process does not end there. Sophisticated
participants go further and effectively suspend further
inference making until the expected minor premise arrives
(also see Reverberi et al., 2007). The more a participant
maintains a narrow set of acceptable minor premises (to
the point that the conditional's antecedent becomes the
only one), the more likely she is to reject the AC argument
in our paradigm. So, the process of pragmatic enrichment
has two extremes. While everyone expects the antecedent,
those who are labeled Endorsers allow the consequent to
be part of further calculations making the conditional appear biconditional; those who are labeled Rejecters effortfully maintain their narrowed expectation throughout a
provided argument. This explains the following three findings: (a) with respect to the arrival of AC's minor premise,
Rejecters (when compared to Endorsers) react with slowdowns and with N2's of greater magnitude, (b) with respect to AC Conclusions, Rejecters produce N2's while
Endorsers respond to AC conclusions much like MP conclusions, and; (c) when carrying out Modus Ponens, Rejecters'
P3b components are linked with greater magnitude
throughout the syllogism. Overall, Rejecters place their
bets on Modus Ponens only.
This is not the first time that a pragmatic account has
been applied to logical terms. Noveck and Sperber (2007)
proposed a narrowing account for robust effects linked to
scalars. For example, underinformative sentences such as

Some cats are mammals prompt relatively fast (and trivially) true responses or slow (and effortful) false ones and
arguably because participants are narrowing the meaning
of Some (e.g. see Bott & Noveck, 2004) from at least two
and possibly all to at least two and fewer than all at a small
cost. Both interpretations require pragmatics, but under
the assumption that increasing narrowing with scalars is
optional and effortful, one can explain how it is associated
with more sophisticated participants and extra time (see
Noveck & Reboul, 2008). With respect to the conditional,
we propose that if-then generates a low level pragmatic
process that raises expectations specifically for the antecedent; what is optional and effortful is maintaining them.
A failure to do so allows AC Endorsements to intervene
through post hoc justifications. Thus, narrowing need not
be viewed as a means to arrive at true responses or false
ones because it is not in the service of logical inference.
Rather, narrowing can be viewed as a general pragmatic
process that works on the linguistic code in opportunistic
ways.
Conditional reasoning paradigms are notorious for
prompting pragmatically valid inference forms such as AC.
We investigated this form by depicting how it is carried
out on-line while juxtaposing it with MP arguments. We
conclude that a conditional statement such as if P then Q
raises the expectation that the conditional's antecedent is
imminent (essentially, the conditional anticipates a Modus
Ponens argument); any other Minor Premise is viewed as a
surprising turn of events and by all participants. Our proposal for the documented variation among participants is
that - while the conditional raises expectations among all
participants about what ought to follow - maintaining narrowed expectations is an effortful process. Those who manage to maintain these expectations are likely to reject AC
arguments while those who do not maintain these expectations, or perhaps cannot, are prone to endorse AC arguments.

References
Allott, N., & Uchida, H. (2009). Natural language indicative conditionals
are classical. UCL Working Papers in Linguistics, 21, 1-17.
Barrouillet, P., Grosset, N., & Lecas, J. (2000). Conditional reasoning by
mental models: Chronometric and developmental evidence.
Cognition, 75, 237-266.
Barrouillet, P., Markovits, H., & Quinn, S. (2002). Developmental and
content effects in reasoning with causal conditionals. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 81, 235-248.
Besson, M., & Faita, F. (1995). Event-Related Potential (Erp) study of
musical expectancy - Comparison of musicians with nonmusicians.
Journal of Experimental Psychology - Human Perception and
Performance, 21, 1278-1296.
Bonnefond, M., & Van der Henst, J. B. (2009). What's behind an inference?
An EEG study with conditional arguments. Neuropsychologia, 47,
3125-3133.
Bott, L., & Noveck, I. A. (2004). Some utterances are underinformative: The
onset and time course of scalar inferences. Journal of Memory and
Language, 51, 437-457.
Braine, M. D. S., & O'Brien, D. (1991). A theory of if: A lexical entry,
reasoning program, and pragmatic principles. Psychological Review,
98, 182-203.
Byrne, R. M., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2009). `If' and the problems of
conditional reasoning. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 13, 282-287.
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences (2nd
ed.). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
De Neys, W., Schaeken, W., & d'Ydewalle, G. (2005). Working memory and
everyday conditional reasoning: Retrieval and inhibition of stored
counterexamples. Thinking & Reasoning, 11, 349-381.

M. Bonnefond et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 67 (2012) 468-485
Evans, J. S. (1993). The mental model theory of conditional reasoning:
Critical appraisal and revision. Cognition, 48, 1-20.
Evans, J. S. (2006). The heuristic-analytic theory of reasoning: Extension
and evaluation. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 13, 378-
395.
Evans, J. S., Ellis, C. E., & Newstead, S. E. (1996). On the mental
representation of conditional sentences. The Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology Section A, 49, 1086-1114.
Evans, J. S., Handley, S. J., Neilens, H., & Over, D. E. (2007). Thinking about
conditionals: A study of individual differences. Memory & Cognition,
35, 1772-1784.
Evans, J. S., Handley, S. J., Neilens, H., & Over, D. (2008). Understanding
causal conditionals: A study of individual differences. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology (Colchester), 61, 1291-1297.
Evans, J. S., Handley, S. J., Neilens, H., & Over, D. (2009). The influence of
cognitive ability and instructional set on causal conditional inference.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology (Colchester), 1-18.
Evans, J. S., & Over, D. E. (2004). If: OUP. Oxford.
Folstein, J. R., & Van Petten, C. (2008). Influence of cognitive control and
mismatch on the N2 component of the ERP: A review.
Psychophysiology, 45, 152-170.
Frederick, S. (2005). Cognitive reflection and decision making. The Journal
of Economic Perspectives, 19, 25-42.
Friederici, A. D., Hahne, A., & Saddy, D. (2002). Distinct neurophysiological
patterns reflecting aspects of syntactic complexity and syntactic
repair. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 31, 45-63.
Geis, M. L., & Zwicky, A. M. (1971). On invited inferences. Linguistic
Inquiry, 2, 561-566.
Gevins, A., Smith, M. E., Le, J., Leong, H., Bennett, J., Martin, N., et al. (1996).
High resolution evoked potential imaging of the cortical dynamics of
human working memory. Electroencephalography and Clinical
Neurophysiology, 98, 327-348.
Girotto, V., Mazzocco, A., & Tasso, A. (1997). The effect of premise order in
conditional reasoning: A test of the mental model theory. Cognition,
63, 1-28.
Honda, M., Barrett, G., Yoshimura, N., Ikeda, A., Nagamine, T., & Shibasaki,
H. (1996). Event-related potentials during paired associate memory
paradigm. Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology, 100,
407-421.
Horn, L. R. (2000). From if to iff: Conditional perfection as pragmatic
strengthening. Journal of Pragmatics, 32, 289-326.
Johnson Laird, P. N., Byrne, R. M., & Schaeken, W. (1992). Propositional
reasoning by model. Psychological Review, 99, 418-439.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R. M. J. (1991). Deduction (Hillsdale, NJ:
Laurence Erlbaum Assoc. ed.). Hillside, NJ: Erlbaum.
Kahneman, D. (2003). A perspective on judgment and choice: Mapping
bounded rationality. American Psychologist, 58, 697-720.
Lea, R. (1995). On-line evidence for elaborative logical inferences in text.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
21, 1469-1482.
Lelekov, T., Dominey, P. F., & Garcia-Larrea, L. (2000). Dissociable ERP
profiles for processing rules vs instances in a cognitive sequencing
task. NeuroReport, 11, 1129-1132.
Marcus, S. L., & Rips, L. J. (1979). Conditional reasoning. Journal of Verbal
Learning and Verbal Behavior, 18, 199-233.

485

Markovits, H., & Barrouillet, P. (2002). The development of conditional
reasoning: A mental model account. Developmental Review, 22, 5-36.
Noveck, I., & Sperber, D. (2007). The why and how of experimental
pragmatics: The case of `scalar inferences'. In N. Burton-Roberts (Ed.),
Pragmatics (pp. 184-212). Basingstoke: Palgrave.
Noveck, I. A., & Reboul, A. (2008). Experimental pragmatics: A Gricean
turn in the study of language. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 12,
425-431.
Nunez-Pena, M. I., & Honrubia-Serrano, M. L. (2004). P600 related to rule
violation in an arithmetic task. Brain Research. Cognitive Brain
Research, 18, 130-141.
Oberauer, K. (2006). Reasoning with conditionals: A test of formal models
of four theories. Cognitive Psychology, 53, 238-283.
Oberauer, K., Hornig, R., Weidenfeld, A., & Wilhelm, O. (2005). Effects of
directionality in deductive reasoning: II. Premise integration and
conclusion evaluation. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology Section A, 58, 1225-1247.
Patel, A. D., Gibson, E., Ratner, J., Besson, M., & Holcomb, P. J. (1998).
Processing syntactic relations in language and music: An eventrelated potential study. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 10, 717-733.
Picton, T. W. (1992). The P300 wave of the human event-related potential.
Journal of Clinical Neurophysiology, 9, 456-479.
Rader, A. W., & Sloutsky, V. M. (2002). Processing of logically valid and
logically invalid conditional inferences in discourse comprehension.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
28, 59-68.
Reverberi, C., Cherubini, P., Rapisarda, A., Rigamonti, E., Caltagirone, C.,
Frackowiak, R. S., et al. (2007). Neural basis of generation of
conclusions in elementary deduction. Neuroimage, 38, 752-762.
Rumain, B., Connell, J., & Braine, M. D. S. (1983). Conversational
comprehension processes are responsible for reasoning fallacies in
children as well as adults: If is not the biconditional. Developmental
Psychology, 19, 471-481.
Santamaria, C., & Espino, O. (2002). Conditionals and directionality: On
the meaning of if vs. only if. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology Section A, 55, 41-57.
Schneider, W., Eschman, A., & Zuccolotto, A. (2002). e-Prime user's guide.
Pittsburgh, PA: Psychology Software Tools.
Sloman, S. A. (1996). The empirical case for two systems of reasoning.
Psychological Bulletin, 119, 3-22.
Sperber, D., Cara, F., & Girotto, V. (1995). Relevance theory explains the
selection task. Cognition, 52, 3-39.
Stalnaker, R. (1968). A theory of conditionals. Studies in logical theory, 2,
98-112.
van der Auwera, J. (1997). Pragmatics in the last quarter century: The case
of conditional perfection. Journal of Pragmatics, 27, 261-274.
Van der Henst, J. B., Bujakowska, K., Ciceron, C., & Noveck, I. A. (2007).
How to make a participant logical: The role of premise presentation in
a conditional reasoning task. Reasoning and Image (Japan).
Wang, Y., Wang, H., Cui, L., Tian, S., & Zhang, Y. (2002). The N270
component of the event-related potential reflects supramodal conflict
processing in humans. Neuroscience Letters, 332, 25-28.
Zhang, X., Wang, Y., Li, S., & Wang, L. (2003). Event-related potential N270,
a negative component to identification of conflicting information
following memory retrieval. Clinical Neurophysiology, 114, 2461-2468.

