C Cambridge University Press 2013 doi:10.1017/S1366728913000047
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition 17 (1), 2014, 203-221 

L2 perception of Spanish
palatal variants across
different tasks

CHRISTINE SHEA
J E F F R E Y R E N AU D
Department of Spanish and Portuguese,
University of Iowa

(Received: September 11, 2011; final revision received: January 13, 2013; accepted: January 14, 2013; first published online 7 March 2013)

While considerable dialectal variation exists, almost all varieties of Spanish exhibit some sort of alternation in terms of the
palatal obstruent segments. Typically, the palatal affricate [] tends to occur in word onset following a pause and in specific
linear phonotactic environments. The palatal fricative [] tends to occur in syllable onset in other contexts. We show that
listeners' perceptual sensitivity to the palatal alternation depends upon the task and exposure to Spanish input. For native
Spanish listeners, the palatal alternation boosts segmentation accuracy on an artificial speech segmentation task and also
reduces latencies on a phonotactically-conditioned elision task. L2 Spanish listeners, on the other hand, only benefit from the
palatal alternation in the second task. These results suggest that while Spanish L2 learners benefit from the presence of the
alternation in linear phonotactic terms, this benefit does not carry over to a more abstract segmentation task.
Keywords: Spanish, allophones, L2 phonology, speech perception

Introduction
Second language (L2) learners are faced with many
challenges when acquiring their target language. One
of the most basic involves detecting and learning
the words of the other language while managing
their already established native (L1) linguistic system.
This task is made even more difficult when we
consider the high variability present in the speech
signal. Variability can be indexical in nature (due to
individual speaker characteristics) or phonotactically
conditioned. Examples of phonotactically-conditioned
variation include alternations that are more likely to
occur in particular contexts than others, such as aspiration
of voiceless stops in English. In the present study, we
examine whether adult second language learners can make
use of this type of information as well by examining their
performance under different task demands.
The alternation tested involves the Spanish palatal obstruents. In many varieties of Spanish, the palatal affricate
[] tends to occur in word onset following a pause and
in specific linear phonotactic environments (following
a nasal or a lateral). The palatal fricative [] tends to
occur in syllable onset in other contexts. While the actual
phonetic realization may vary across dialects, almost all
varieties of Spanish exhibit some sort of alternation in
terms of these segments. Given this, we hypothesize that
* We would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for recommendations
on how to improve this manuscript. We would also like to thank
participants at the University of Iowa and the Centro de Ensenanza
Extranjera at the Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico (CELEUNAM) in Mexico City.

native Spanish listeners will rely upon these statistical
regularities of their native language when carrying out
speech tasks. That is, they will tend to relate the palatal
affricate to word onset position and the fricative to word
medial. Since this knowledge depends upon extensive
experience with Spanish, we also tested L2 Spanish
listeners on the same set of tasks. We hypothesized that due
to their more limited experience with Spanish, they will
not have established the relationship between segments
and positions that the native listeners are predicted to
have. We also hypothesized that task demands will play
a role in how these cross-linguistic effects play out.
To test this, we conducted a series of four experiments
to investigate how task demands modulate the way in
which L2 listeners use distributional information in the
input. In Experiments 1 and 2, we examined how English
phonological relationships and phonetic cues play into the
way L1 English/L2 Spanish listeners perceive the palatal
alternation. In Experiment 3 participants carried out an
artificial language segmentation task in which we varied
the presence of the palatal variant. Finally, in Experiment
4, participants had to identify a word that followed an
onset syllable. The final sound of the onset syllable either
favored or disfavored, in phonotactic terms, the particular
palatal onset that followed. These experiments combine
to paint a picture of how L2 learners perceive and make
use of the same information in the speech signal across a
variety of different tasks.
Palatals in Spanish and English
Spanish attests numerous palatal and palatoalveolar
phonetic categories, graphically corresponding to ll (e.g.,

Address for correspondence:
Christine Shea, 412 Phillips Hall, Department of Spanish and Portuguese, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52240, USA
christine-shea@uiowa.edu

204

Christine Shea and Jeffrey Renaud

llave "key"), y (playa "beach") and hi(e) (hierro "iron").
Cross-dialectically the Spanish palatal obstruents exhibit
a tremendous degree of variability. In Castilian Spanish,
these targets can range from a glide [j] to fricative [] to
affricate [] along a continuum of constriction degrees
(Aguilar, 1997, p. 69, in Hualde, 2005, p. 165). In this
variety, the voiced palatal continuant [] usually occurs
after a vowel or a continuant consonant (e.g., in maya
["maa] "Mayan", la llave [la "ae] "the key", la hierba
[la "e|a] "the grass"; see Hualde, 2005) while a voiced
affricate or plosive occurs after a lateral or nasal consonant
or after a pause. In central Mexican and Caribbean
Spanish, however, affricate productions are often found
in intervocalic position (see Jimenez Sabater 1975,
pp. 108-110; Lope Blanch 1989, 1996; Martin
Butragueno, forthcoming, in Campos-Astorkiza, 2012,
p. 98). In northern Mexico and parts of the American
Southwest, the glide predominates (see Alvar 1996
in Campos-Astorkiza, 2012, p. 98; Lipski 1990). As
discussed below, Standard Argentinian Spanish (including
Uruguay), has a different pronunciation of these segments,
exhibiting a prepalatal fricative [Z] where other dialects
have a palatal target. Indeed, when studying these
segments, Hualde (2004, 2005) states that it is best to
conceptualize them as occurring along a continuum of
dialect-dependent and position-dependent factors.
There have been few exhaustive studies carried out
on the palatal obstruents and their phonetic realizations
across dialects. Work by Aguilar (1997) on the Castilian
dialect stands out, as does work by Martinez-Celdran
(2008). Aguilar (1997) examined glide [j] and high front
vowel [i] productions by Castilian Spanish speakers. She
found that the glide [j] is shorter than the vowel (an average
of 82 ms vs. 110 ms, respectively) and with higher F1
and lower F2 values. In terms of the obstruents, Martinez
Celdran and Fernandez Planas (2007) claim that there are
only two obstruent palatal phones in Spanish, [] and [] ,
and one palatal semivowel [j]. The first is an approximant,
manifesting little if any frication in its articulation while
for the second, the authors prefer to call it a double
articulation, rather than an affricate, given that the second
element does not exhibit the frication that accompanies
the release of the stop.
Phonological analyses vary as to whether the fricative is
a phoneme itself, due to its [consonantal] feature, or rather
a consonantal variant of the high front vowel, conditioned
by position in the word (Hualde, 2004). For the purpose
of the present study, we remain agnostic as to precisely
how the palatal obstruents are represented.
The palatal targets tend toward complementary
distribution determined in part by three linguistic factors:
prosody, the preceding segment and word position. The
likelihood of either the approximant [] or fricative []
is higher in unstressed syllables, while stressed syllables
favor strengthening, resulting in either the fricative []

or affricate []. The surrounding phonetic context,
specifically the preceding sound, also influences the
alternation. The approximant and fricative are more likely
in post-vocalic position, while post-pause, post-nasal and
post-lateral positions favor the affricate or even the palatal
stop []. Word-internal position (medial or final) increases
the probability of the approximant and fricative, while the
affricate and stop are more likely to appear in word-initial
position.
While not directly relevant to the study at hand, external
factors such as speech rate, register and formality also
affect the alternation. Faster and/or informal speech favors
the approximant and fricative while slow, monitored,
formal and/or emphatic speech increases the likelihood
of the affricate and stop variants. As has been implied
throughout this discussion, this is not to say, for example,
that the approximant is categorically barred from contexts
that tend to favor the affricate, or vice versa. To the
contrary, every variant from the Spanish palatal continuum
is POSSIBLE in any given context, yet particular contexts
seem to FAVOR one variant (or one end of the continuum)
relative to the other. The empirical goal of the present
study is therefore to determine if native and L2 listeners
use these TENDENCIES in speech segmentation and word
recognition tasks. For example, we will argue in more
detail in Sections 4 and 5 below that such tendencies
aid word segmentation in Spanish; the likelihood of
encountering a word boundary when presented with a
palatal affricate or stop is higher than when presented
with either the fricative or approximant given that wordinitial position FAVORS the stop or affricate relative to
the fricative or approximant. Even though the fricative
and approximant are both POSSIBLE in this position, their
appearance is LESS LIKELY compared to the likelihood
of, for example, the affricate, even in running/connected
speech (Pineros, 2009, p. 207).
The fact that the three linguistic factors interact and
cannot be applied independently further confirms that the
alternation is one of general tendencies and not categorical
absolutes. The issue is compounded when the external
factors are also considered in natural speech outside of
the empirical setting. To take as examples, consider una
llave "a key" and conyuge "spouse". In the first case,
the palatal segment orthographically corresponding to ll
is stressed and word-initial, two factors that suggest the
likelihood of a stop or affricate. On the other hand, it
is simultaneously post-vocalic, which otherwise tends to
favor the approximant or fricative. In the second case,
the palatal segment, here represented by y, is internal and
unstressed, both of which are normally associated with the
approximant or fricative. Phonetically, however, it is postnasal, which favors strengthening to the stop or affricate.
It is this confluence of factors that demonstrates why any
given alternant might be possible in any given position.
Even so, tendencies such as those discussed above can

Spanish palatal variants and L2 speech perception
still be observed in the data and the present study seeks
to determine if the two groups of listeners can apply these
tendencies across four different speech tasks.
In the case of the L2 group, knowledge of the
palatal alternation is a question of acquisition that
we pursue experimentally considering that it is not
"transferable" from English. English contains at least
three palatal phonetic categories: approximant [j], voiced
[Z] and voiceless [S] palatoalveolar fricatives and voiced
palatoalveolar affricate [dZ]. At the moment we are
only concerned with the palatal approximant [j] and
palatoalveolar affricate [dZ] in comparing the two
systems as our L2 learners were not exposed to the
Argentinean/Uruguayan Spanish dialects that employ [Z]
and [S], nor was our test stimuli representative of such
dialects. Unlike Spanish, however, English palatals do
not exist on a continuum and are not representative of
predictable variants, as substituting one palatal for another
in a given word runs the risk of changing the meaning.
Both the approximant [j] and affricate [dZ] can appear
in initial stressed (yet, jet), initial unstressed (yourself,
judgmental), internal stressed (beyond, pajamas) and
internal unstressed (kayak, major) positions. Furthermore,
the preceding segments play no role, as both freely appear
in post-vocalic (a year, a jeer), post-nasal (unyielding,
enjoin) and post-lateral (all year, all jeer) positions.
Additionally, the palatoalveolar affricate [dZ] is a possible
coda segment in English (bridge), which is categorically
impossible in Spanish.
To summarize, given that English palatals [j] and
[dZ] are not predictable based on position, do not exist
on a continuum and are not interchangeable without
semantic consequence, the L2 Spanish learner coming
from English is faced with the task of acquiring novel
phonetic categories (palatal fricative, affricate and stop)
and recognizing that, although each palatal segment
is POSSIBLE in all positions, not unlike English, each
position tends to FAVOR one category over the other, a
fact for which English offers no guidance.
For the purposes of this paper, the positing of an
underlying form is not necessary. We assume that the
occurrence of either the less-consonant-like [] or the
more consonant-like [] is due to where in the word
or phrase the sound occurs. Moreover, as stated above,
the alternation is non-categorical in nature. Indeed, in
probabilistic terms, the affricate alternant will be more
likely to occur in phrase-initial position and the fricative
alternant in word-medial position but this is never 100%
and will depend, as stated above, upon phonotactics,
orthography and dialectal variation. Nonetheless, our goal
was to investigate whether learners are aware of the
role played by the affricate variant in indicating wordonsets, rather than recognizing the difference between the
two variants and their positional restrictions. Thus, even
though both variants can probabilistically occur in word

205

onset, the affricate is highly unlikely to occur in wordmedial, intervocalic position, suggesting that it plays
a strong role in recognizing potential onsets to lexical
candidates in Spanish.
L2 Speech perception and allophonic variants
Research has shown that the pattern of allophonic
alternations in the listener's native language influences
speech perception (Boomershine, Hall, Hume & Johnson,
2008; Dupoux, Pallier, Sebastian-Galles & Mehler, 1997).
In a study directly related to English and Spanish, Boomershine et al. (2008) investigated the perception of [d], [D]
and [|] by speakers of Spanish and English. In English,
[|] and [d] may alternate with each other while [D] does
not alternate with either; in Spanish, on the other hand,
[D] and [d] alternate while [|] is contrastive. Boomershine
et al. found that English listeners rated [|] and [d] as more
similar to each other than Spanish listeners did, while [D]
and [d] were more similar for Spanish listeners than for
English listeners. In a subsequent speeded discrimination
task, Boomershine et al. (2008) found that these crosslinguistic patterns of perceptual similarity also held. The
authors concluded that the phonological relationships that
hold in the listener's native phonological inventory play a
determining role in speech perception.
The results from Boomershine et al. show that L1
segmental relationships affect L2 perception. However,
such alternations are by definition conditioned by the
environment in which they occur and experienced listeners
can take advantage of this probabilistic knowledge when
carrying out speech perception tasks. One area where this
knowledge is particularly useful is in the segmentation
of the continuous speech stream. An extensive body
of research has shown that infants and adult learners
use all types of information in their search for word
boundaries. While different segmentation heuristics are
available, one particular mechanism has been shown to
operate across all groups studied so far: the tracking of
statistical information, such as transitional probabilities
(TPs: Saffran, Aslin & Newport, 1996). The essential
logic behind tracking TPs is that within-word probabilities
across syllables are higher than across-word probabilities,
and where a probabilistic trough occurs, the listener
assumes a word boundary has been encountered.
Researchers have recently begun to explore how
such a mechanism might operate in adults acquiring a
second language. One key issue revolves around how
previous learning potentially interferes with tracking a
new set of statistical relations and how separate statistical
relations between languages are maintained. Current work
shows that in general, listeners exposed to two different
"languages" (distinguished by different TPs) require
either indexical information (Weiss, Gerfen & Mitchel,
2009) or pauses and explicit instruction (Gebhart, Aslin

206

Christine Shea and Jeffrey Renaud

& Newport, 2009) to inform them that there were two
separate sets of statistics to be tracked.
Previous learning can also affect the way in which
statistics are calculated across the input. For example,
language-specific phonotactic knowledge can affect the
way in which TPs are tracked and such knowledge,
accumulated over years of experience with a native
language, may impede successful storage and tracking of
new regularities in the input. Research by Finn and Hudson
Kam (2008) examined how native language phonotactic
knowledge drives the segmentation of an artificial
language stream by native English speakers. In their study,
listeners preferred words that violated transitional probabilities but respected phonotactic regularities when tested
on both after exposure to an artificial language stream.
The authors interpret this finding to mean that linguistic
knowledge takes priority over whatever statistical mechanism may be at work in speech segmentation. In other
words, the tracking of transitional probabilities can be
boosted by the presence of additional cues that may assist
with segmenting the speech stream. More importantly,
when such phonotactic cues are violated, listeners are
prevented from successful segmentation altogether. Tyler
and Cutler (2009) examined the role of prosodic cues
in artificial speech segmentation by listeners of differing
L1s. Their findings suggests that both language-universal
(final vowel lengthening) and language-specific (pitch
movement) information affected segmentation by native
Dutch, English and French listeners.
The evidence suggests that both TP and phonotactic
knowledge likely emerge from a distribution-based
learning mechanism. However, there are important
differences in terms of where these statistics come from.
Using phonotactic knowledge for speech segmentation
involves the application of generalized knowledge taken
from specific instances (typically assumed to be type
frequencies across the lexicon; see Pierrehumbert, 2006)
and applying it to potential word forms. Thus, as Finn
and Hudson Kam (2008) argue, phonotactic knowledge
reflects input to which learners have been exposed over
the course of their language experience, tracking TPs does
not necessarily reflect such long term knowledge and can
be easily manipulated over the short term.
In our third experiment, participants were exposed to an
artificial language based upon a "new variety of Spanish"
that either contained the palatal alternation or did not.
Subsequently, they were tested on their ability to judge
which member of a pair of words occurred in the language.
We hypothesized that the native Spanish speaking group
would benefit from the presence of the palatal alternation
to a greater extent than the L2 Spanish group given their
familiarity with the allophonic alternation in their native
language.
In Experiment 4 we tap into another type of
probabilistic knowledge, that of phonotactics. Native

listeners use phonotactic knowledge when segmenting
the speech signal and thus benefit from the presence of
phonotactically legal sequences when carrying out speech
processing tasks. To test whether non-native speakers also
benefit from such knowledge, we designed an elision task
in which listeners had to strip away a context syllable
to recognize the lexical item that remained. We predict
that when the final segment of the context syllable favors
a particular palatal variant and the following lexical
item begins with the expected variant, listeners with
greater Spanish experience will recognize the lexical item
faster than when phonological expectations are violated.
For example, context syllables ending in vowels will
favor fricative onsets for the adjacent word while those
ending in nasals or laterals will favor affricate-initial
words. Again, we varied the onset palatal to follow
phonotactic expectations (alternating condition) or not
(non-alternating condition).
Some evidence for this prediction comes from Weber
and Cutler (2006). They examined how such boundary
effects play out in a word spotting experiment with
highly proficient L1 German/L2 English and native
American English speakers. The stimuli consisted of
embedded English or (different condition) German words.
They found that accuracy and response latencies were
facilitated by boundaries that coincided with word-onset
phonotactics for both languages (e.g., "wish" in yarWISH
versus plookWISH) and boundaries that only occurred in
English facilitated recognition by both groups, albeit to a
lesser extent for the native German speakers.
The experiments reported on here help elucidate how
task demands can modulate the performance of L2
listeners. Crucially, by examining the same variant under
different task requirements, it is possible to see how
information available for one task may or may not be
available for another.
Experiment 1: Similarity rating task
In Experiment 1, native Spanish and L2 Spanish listeners
heard pairs of nonwords that varied on the position and
type of palatal variant and had to rate their similarity.
The objective is to determine how language-specific
perception affects the similarity judgments of two sounds
that exhibit different relations of contrast across listeners'
first and second languages. Based upon previous work
showing that the pattern of phonological relations between
sounds in a listener's native language plays a strong role
in how listeners rate their similarity (Boomershine et al.,
2008; Johnson & Babel, 2010), we predict that the native
Spanish listeners will rate minimal pairs of nonwords
with the palatal alternants as more similar than the L1
English/L2 Spanish listeners, given the L2 listeners'
limited experience with Spanish and, importantly, the
phonemic status of the target sounds in English.

Spanish palatal variants and L2 speech perception

207

Table 1. Biographical information.

Group
Native Spanish
(n = 29)
L1 English/L2 Spanish
(n = 30)

Age

Years studying
foreign language

Age started
studying

M = 21.3 (0.8)

M = 4.1 (1.1)

M = 10.1

M = 20.2 (1.2)

M = 4.8 (1.2)

M = 14.5

Participants
Twenty-nine native (Mexican) Spanish speakers (NSS, 17
males, 12 females) participated in the experiment. They
were recruited from the Center for Foreign Language
Teaching at the National Autonomous University of
Mexico (CELE-UNAM). They received $10.00 for their
participation in the experiment. Thirty L1 English/L2
Spanish listeners (L2 Spanish) were recruited from the
University of Iowa. They received course credit for their
participation. Biographical information on both groups of
participants is presented in Table 1.
The two groups were similar in terms of age and
years of studying their second language. None of the
participants had lived in a country where their second
language was spoken for a period longer than two weeks
and none interacted in their second language outside
the classroom. In Mexico (particularly Mexico City)
it is difficult to find university-level students who do
not listen to music or watch television in English. The
L2 Spanish group did not listen to Spanish music or
watch Spanish television outside of their classes. In terms
of Spanish varieties, the L2 listeners were typical of
college-level learners, in that they had been exposed to
a wide variety of different accents over their course of
study, with no particular variety being dominant for any of
the learners. None expressed previous exposure to Buenos
Aires/Uruguayan dialect.

Stimuli
A native female Mexican Spanish speaker recorded the
stimuli. She read each word three times and the clearest
tokens were spliced out and used for the experimental
stimuli. The target stimuli consisted of six CV.CV or six
V.CV bisyllabic words. The CV.CV items took the form of
CV-ma (e.g., [ama]  [ama]), where onsets were either
[] or [], combined with the vowels [a o u]. Tokens were
produced with stress on the initial syllable. For the V.CV
target items, the palatal sounds were combined with three
vowels [a o u] (e.g., [ua]  [ua]). For the fillers, the
onsets consisted of [s l r], which were combined with the
vowels [a o u]. Stress was uniformly produced on the first
syllable.

Stimuli were checked to guarantee that target segments
in different positions shared the same acoustic properties.
To this end, each of the affricate and fricative targets -
in initial and medial positions - were measured and compared based upon their phonetic characteristics. For the
affricate targets, we noted the amount of frication following the stop release, the overall segment duration and the
presence (if any) of a release burst from the stop portion of
the affricate. We further measured the intensity of the stop
release burst relative to the intensity of the following vowel
to factor out the effect of the differences in overall intensity
across tokens. Burst intensity (dB) was subtracted from
the vowel intensity (Sundara, 2005). A greater intensity
difference will result with softer bursts, indicating a
weaker release on the stop. For the fricative targets,
we measured the segment duration and the intensity
compared to the following vowel. In Table 2 we present
the differences between the average values for each of the
target token segments in onset and medial positions.
As can be seen from these acoustic measurements, the
target segments were produced almost identically in onset
and medial position. Moreover, as indicated by the presence of a release burst in the affricate segments, lower intensity ratios and shorter durations, we can also safely assume that the affricates were indeed distinct from the fricative targets. In Figure 1 we present examples of the stimuli
used in Experiment 1 (and Experiment 2, see below).
Each token was combined into either a "same" or
"different" pair taken from the same category, whether
CV.CV or V.CV. For the same pairs, different tokens of the
same item were presented. For the different pairs, different
versions of the alternation were used, whether the affricate
or fricative. In Table 3 we present the composition of the
experimental trials.
Given the form of the stimuli, some were real words in
Spanish.1 There were a total of 36 trials (24 different, 12
same target word). The interval between each member of
the pair was 500 ms.

1

Some of the trials included real words (e.g., [oa] olla "pot", see
Table 3). To verify that the lexical status of certain stimuli was not
affecting the results, we ran the same statistical analyses without
the tokens that were possible words in Spanish and the results were
consistent.

208

Christine Shea and Jeffrey Renaud

Table 2. Acoustic description of stimuli.

Segment position

Duration
difference (mean)

Within segments/across position
fricative
5 ms
[oma]/[oa]
affricate
4.7 ms
[uma]/[ua]
Between segments/same position
onset
22 ms
[oma]/[oma]
medial
4 ms
[oa]/[oa]

Intensity ratio
(segment: segment)

Token
duration (mean)

0.97
(SD = .025)
.98

463 ms
(SD = 11)
460.2 ms
(SD = 9.8)

1.18

8 ms

1.23

4 ms

Frication duration
difference (affricate)

Burst intensity
difference (affricate)

3.33 ms

2 dB

Figure 1. (Colour online) Examples of stimuli used for Experiments 1 and 2.

Procedure
The stimuli were presented in pairs using a Macbook Pro
computer running Superlab experimental software. After
the trial pair offset, participants had 3500 ms to circle
the number on a sheet of paper that corresponded to their
judgment of the two words: 1 signified that the words

in the pair were "the same" and 5 signified that the two
stimuli in the pair were "very different". The trials were
randomized for each participant. Participants were given
three practice trials before beginning. Practice items were
not taken from the test trial items.
In an effort to have both groups listening in Spanish,
they were told that the items were based upon possible

Spanish palatal variants and L2 speech perception

209

Table 3. AX rating task trials.
CV.CV
Same

Target pairs

Filler pairs



Different

[]ama
[]oma
[]ama
[]uma

[]ama
[]oma
[]ama
[]uma

[s]ama
[s]oma
[l]oma
[r]ama

[s]ama
[s]oma
[l]oma
[r]ama

[]ama
[]oma
[]uma
[]ama
[]oma
[]uma
[l]ama
[l]oma
[l]oma
[l]uma
[r]ama
[r]uma

Same
[]ama
[]oma
[]uma
[]ama
[]oma
[]uma
[s]ama
[s]oma
[r]oma
[r]uma
[s]ama
[s]uma

Different

a[]a
o[]a
o[]a
u[]a

a[]a
o[]a
o[]a
u[]a

o[s]a
o[l]a
u[l]a
a[r]a

o[s]a
o[l]a
u[l]a
a[r]a

a[]a
o[]a
u[]a
a[]a
o[]a
u[]a
a[l]a
o[l]a
o[l]a
u[l]a
a[r]a
u[r]a

a[]a
o[]a
u[]a
a[]a
o[]a
u[]a
a[s]a
o[s]a
o[r]a
u[r]a
a[s]a
u[s]a

= possible Spanish word

words and combinations of sounds from that language.
Their task was to decide how similar the two words were
based upon the sounds in each. All communication with
participants occurred in Spanish in an effort to guarantee
that the L2 Spanish participants were carrying out all tasks
in Spanish.
Results
All rhotic items were subsequently dropped because of
inconsistent results.2
For the "same" trials, a similar rating pattern emerged
for both groups, with 96% of responses corresponding to
1 (or "same") and the remaining 4% were 2, or "similar".
Given these results, we will only address the "different"
trials in the analysis that follows. In Table 4 we present
the distribution of the rating scores from Experiment 1.
The data in Table 4 show that for the "different" stimuli,
the native Spanish speakers' scores clustered around two
modes: "2" and "4" while the L2 listeners were almost
uniform in their rating of "5". Because the data have nonnormal distribution and involve rating scores, we used the
Mann-Whitney U-test to determine if there are differences
among the rating scores associated with the two groups.
The Mann-Whitney U test showed a significant difference

2

V.CV

The issue that arose with the rhotics was with the native Spanish
speakers. Specifically, the stimuli were not uniformly perceivable as
either the trill or tap phoneme. Where the rhotic was judged as more
tap-like in word initial position, a violation of Spanish phonotactics
occurred (only the trill can occur in initial position). The native
Spanish listeners commented that it sounded more like a "d" onset
than the desired trill.

between the means on the rating scores for the two groups:
U = 41016; exact p < .001, two-tailed.
We conducted a second analysis to determine if there
were any differences in rating scores for the different types
of target trials across the two groups. Again, because
the data are not normally distributed, we used the nonparametric Friedman Test to investigate whether there was
an effect for position of the allophone (onset vs. medial,
CV.CV vs. V.CV). Extensive cross-linguistic research has
shown that onset hardening is common in many disparate
languages (Kenstowicz, 1994: Basque; Gordon, 1997:
Estonian) and there is a general tendency across languages
to strengthen consonant articulations in initial position of
elements found in the prosodic hierarchy (Cho, 2001;
Fougeron & Keating, 1997). This may mean listeners
are more attuned to the differences between the two
palatal variants in initial position than in medial position.
Given this, we might expect a higher proportion of "very
different" (5) responses for the CV.CV items than for
the medial target items and further predict that these
differences will be greater for the native Spanish listeners
than for the L2 Spanish listeners. The results show that
indeed, the native Spanish listeners are more sensitive
to the variant in onset position than the L2 listeners,
X2 (4) = 22.6, p < .001. For medial position, there was
also a significant difference between groups, although it
was not as pronounced as for onset position, X2 (4) = 8.2,
p < .05. In order to determine if these differences were
significant across positions for each group, we conducted
another chi-square test. For the native Spanish listeners,
there was a significant difference for position, X2 (2) = 9.3,
p < .01, while for the L2 listeners, position was not
significant, X2 (2) = 6.2, p = .089.

210

Christine Shea and Jeffrey Renaud

Table 4. Percentage for each rating score on "different" responses for target item trials (raw total in parentheses,
emboldened and underlined segment represents the target sound).
Score (% of total "different" trials for group)

Group
NSS
n = 696
(% response
for trial type)
L2 Span
n = 720
(% response
for trial type)

1
(same)

2

3

4

5
(very different)

2% (15)
CV.ma
1%
(7)

V.CV
1%
(8)

29% (201)
CV.ma
V.CV
8%
21%
(55)
(146)

1.6% (13)
CV.ma
V.CV
0.7%
0.9%
(7)
(6)

62% (431)
CV.ma
V.CV
36%
26%
(250)
(181)

6% (41)
CV.ma
1%
(7)

1.7% (12)
CV.ma
V.CV
0.8%
0.8%
(6)
(6)

1.25% (9)
CV.ma
V.CV
0.5%
0.5%
(4)
(5)

1.8% (13)
CV.ma
V.CV
0.8%
0.9%
(6)
(7)

8.1% (58)
CV.ma
V.CV
3.1%
4.7%
(23)
(35)

87% (628)
CV.ma
V.CV
40%
47%
(288)
(340)

Mean (SD)

3.42 (1.48)
V.CV
5%
(34)
4.78 (0.705)

NSS = native Spanish speakers

Discussion
The results from this experiment show that native Spanish
listeners rate the "different" trials as more similar than the
L2 Spanish listeners. This suggests that the same input
is grouped into separate modes by the different listener
groups, based upon perceived similarity. Specifically, the
native Spanish listeners demonstrate two modes in their
rating of the palatal trials, with 29% of listeners rating
them as similar (with a value of 2) and 62% rating them as
different (with a value of 4). This result stands in contrast
to that obtained from the L2 Spanish listeners, who rated
the different trials almost uniformly (89%) with 5, or "very
different".
We further observed significantly different rating
scores from the native Spanish listeners when the palatal
alternation occurred in word-initial position versus wordmedial position. In ONSET position, native Spanish
listeners rated the stimuli as "similar" only 8% of the
time while "different" was selected 36% of the time,
or more than four times as often. However, when the
alternation occurred in WORD - MEDIAL position, native
Spanish listeners' ratings were much more evenly split,
specifically, "similar" was selected 21% of the time while
"different" was selected 26% of the time. Finally, for those
who preferred the 2 rating, this preference aligned 89%
of the time with stimuli that had high back vowels, which
may be due to the high feature of the vowel interacting
with the palatal feature of the consonants.
The position-related perceptual rating differences
suggest that native Spanish listeners perceive the
alternation as more distinct in onset position than in
medial position. In other words, the two variants were
rated differently in terms of similarity depending upon
the syllabic position. This suggests that native Spanish

listeners demonstrate position-specific perceptual patterns
when making similarity judgments of this type. Indeed,
the judgments of "different" were overwhelmingly more
common for the word-onset position, suggesting a higher
degree of sensitivity in this position (or, as a reviewer
pointed out, it is also possible that there is much less
variability in the input in this position, leading to more
binary judgments).
In Experiment 2 we use a different task to examine
the perception of the same contrast. In an effort to
determine if such language-specific effects carried down
to lower-level perception, listeners carried out a speeded
AX discrimination task. Research examining adult speech
perception using rating and speeded AX discrimination
has brought mixed results. While Boomershine et al.
(2008) found that language-specific listening occurred
in both the rating and speeded AX discrimination tasks,
Johnson and Babel (2010) found that language-specific
listening only occurred for the speeded AX discrimination
task when listeners had longer response times (RTs).

Experiment 2: Speeded AX discrimination task
Participants
The same 29 native Spanish and 30 L2 Spanish
participants from Experiment 1 participated in Experiment 2. All experimental tasks were counterbalanced
across participants and participants never completed
Experiments 1 and 2 consecutively (a pseudocounterbalanced order was used to avoid this, whereby
Experiments 1 and 2 bookended the session). The
results from five native Spanish speaker participants were
discarded because they informed the experimenter after

Spanish palatal variants and L2 speech perception
finishing that they had confused the response buttons
for many of their answers. Three L2 Spanish listener
results were discarded because more than 50% of their
responses were too slow (longer than 500 ms) and
four were discarded because they confused the response
buttons (again, they informed the experimenter after the
experiment was finished). This gave a total of 24 and 22
participants for each group.
Stimuli
The target stimuli took the same form as that used for
Experiment 1. There were two important differences,
however. First, we added an extra vowel, [e], to the trial
sets, giving [a e o u] for the CV.CV trials. We used the
consonants [p b | r] and the clusters [bl t1| d1| k| kl] for the
filler trials.3 There were 144 trials in total: 32 targets (16
"same"/"different" for CV.CV and V.CV targets) and 112
fillers.
Procedure
The goal of this experiment was to test auditory-level
responses with as little interference from higher-level
categories as possible. Thus, the trial pairs were presented
with a very short 100 ms interstimulus interval (ISI) and a
500 ms response deadline. Listeners were told they would
hear a pair of invented words based on Spanish and they
were to determine if the second member of the pair was the
same or different from the first member. They were told
to respond as quickly and accurately as possible by means
of a button on a button box attached to the computer. The
experiment was conducted using Superlab experimental
software on a Mac computer. If no response was recorded,
the program continued to the next trial. Every eight to ten
trials a screen appeared reminding listeners that they were
to respond as quickly as possible. If they exceeded the
500 ms limit, a screen appeared telling them their response
was too slow and that no answer was recorded. Listeners
were provided with five practice trials before beginning
the experiment. They received feedback on accuracy and
reaction time for the practice trials.
Results
Across the two groups, responses which exceeded the
500 ms limit constituted 8.9% of the trials for the
native Spanish listeners and 9.3% for the L2 Spanish
3

[t1| d1|] were only used for "same" trials after submitting the tokens
to evaluation by three native Spanish speakers after running the
experiment (not part of the study group) who stated that these
particular tokens were not clearly audible. Three of the native Spanish
speaker participants commented on the fact that they were not sure if
they were in fact hearing the voiced or voiceless occlusive.

211

group. These responses were discarded. We then divided
the responses into same/different and subsequently
correct/incorrect categories. For the "same" trials, the
accuracy rate was 97.3% for the native Spanish listeners
and 95.2% for the L2 Spanish listeners. We conducted
a one-way ANOVA for group on the proportion of
correct responses for the "same" trials and found no
significant differences in accuracy rates, F(1,732) = .81,
p = .21. Subsequently we conducted a one-way ANOVA
on LogRT latencies for the "same" trials and again
found no significant differences between the two groups,
F(1,732) = 1.02, p = .19. Given that the objective of this
experiment is to investigate how speeded discrimination
affects perception of the palatal variants on the "different"
trials, we did not include the response time and latencies
for the "same" trials in further statistical analyses. For
the "different" trials, the accuracy rates were 91% for
the native Spanish listeners and 93% for the L2 Spanish
listeners.
We analyzed the data using a three-way mixed ANOVA,
with group (native or L2 Spanish) as the between-subjects
factor and variant and position as the within-subjects
factors. LogRT was the dependent variable. The first
member of the trial pair determined the condition for
the trial. The results revealed a significant main effect
for group, F(1,44) = 14.2, p < .001. There was also a
significant interaction among the factors, F(2,45) = 4.9,
p < .01. In Figure 2 we show the LogRTs for each
condition, separated by group.
To examine the interaction between condition and
group more fully, we conducted a series of independent
t-tests on the means for each condition for each language
group. Tests of the four a priori hypotheses were conducted
using Bonferroni adjusted alpha levels of .0125 per
test (.05/4) of each position and variant combination.
For the native Spanish group, significant results
emerged across the medial affricate-onset affricate pairs,
t(155) = 2.52, p = .013,the medial fricative-onset fricative
pairs, t(155) = 5.1, p < .000 and the medial affricatemedial fricative (t(155) = 5.14, p < .001). Only the onset
affricate-onset fricative (t(155) = -2.24, p = .027) did
not reach significance. For the L2 Spanish listeners,
significant differences emerged only for the medial
affricate-medial fricative (t(154) = 4.24, p < .001).
Discussion
The results from the speeded AX discrimination task
support previous research (Babel & Johnson, 2010)
demonstrating a language effect even in tasks that draw
upon auditory representations. Babel and Johnson (2010)
found language-specific discrimination of fricatives,
where longer response latencies correlated with languagespecific discrimination. The results obtained here appear
to support this conclusion as well. The native Spanish

212

Christine Shea and Jeffrey Renaud

Figure 2. LogRT for speeded AX discrimination task across groups and conditions.

speakers demonstrated significant effects for both position
and variant across three of the four pairs (the exception
being in onset position), suggesting that this group
has stored the variants in a position-sensitive manner
that may be close to complementary distribution, in
spite of the gradiency present in the linguistic input.
(The experimental stimuli were binary, which may have
influenced the outcome.) For the L2 listeners, significant
effects were reached only for the variants in medial
position.
These results are somewhat surprising, given those
obtained in Experiment 1 where the native Spanish
listeners perceived the two variants as similar-sounding
while the learner group did not. One way of accounting
for the apparently conflicting results is the nature of the
task. When carrying out similarity judgments, L2 listeners
heard the two palatal variants as very different. Yet when
asked to discriminate between them, as in Experiment
2, the same listeners failed to do so in three of four
possible conditions. For the native Spanish speakers, the
opposite situation held. When given time to contemplate
their answers, the palatal variants were classified as more
"similar" than different. When given limited time to
distinguish between the two, the native Spanish listeners
did so successfully, with responses divided along position.
In Experiment 3 we examine how the two listener
groups use the palatal alternation in an artificial speech
segmentation task. Given our results thus far, we predict
that the native Spanish speakers exposed to an artificial
language stream WITH the palatal alternation will be
more successful at segmenting word forms than those
exposed to an input stream WITHOUT the alternation. The
results from Experiment 1 suggest that when given tasks
that appeal to higher-level representations, native Spanish
speakers rate the sounds as different but not as different
as unrelated phonemes. L2 listeners, on the other hand,

rated the palatal variants as "very different", which may
mean that they are not aware of these sounds are tightly
linked to certain probabilistic distributions in the Spanish
input. If this is true, L2 Spanish listeners will rely upon
transitional probabilities as their only cue to segmentation
and the availability of the palatal variant as a cue to "word"
boundaries will not boost the segmentation accuracy for
the L2 learners. They are predicted to be at chance for
both input streams.
Experiment 3: Artificial language segmentation task
In an artificial language segmentation task, listeners are
exposed to input streams of concatenated syllables with
different co-occurrence probabilities. Listeners begin to
recognize as potential word forms syllables that co-occur
with greater frequency in the input; conversely, syllables
that do not co-occur are not grouped together as possible
word forms. For example, if a listener has no knowledge of
Spanish, but yet hears the word casa "house" repeatedly
in the speech stream surrounded by other words, she
will eventually realize that the syllables ca+sa form a
coherent word unit in Spanish. Typically, researchers
manipulate the transitional probabilities between syllables
to indicate possible `word' boundaries. In Experiment 3,
we added an extra element and instead of having listeners
rely solely upon the co-occurrence probabilities across
syllables when segmenting out possible word forms, half
the participants were exposed to a speech stream with
the palatal alternation present and the other half were
exposed to a speech stream with no palatal alternation.
Thus, half our listeners had the additional cue of the palatal
alternation to boost their segmentation accuracy, provided
they were sensitive to the role it plays in indicating
a probabilistic word boundary in Spanish. In AltSpan
(with the alternation), the transitional probabilities (TPs)

Spanish palatal variants and L2 speech perception

213

Table 5. Test items for artificial language segmentation task.
Target words
Alternating
Non-Alternating

[a.pi.nu]
[ja.pi.nu]

Alternating
Non-Alternating

[so.b|o.a]
[so.b|o.ja]

[e.f|u.so]
[je.f|u.so]

[mu.pi.ja]
[mu.pi.ja]
Part words
[b|e.ni.e]
[a.f|a.lu]
[b|e.ni.je]
[ja.f|a.lu]

were boosted by the presence of the palatal variants in
their expected positions while in NonAltSpan (without
the alternation), only the fricative variant occurred and
listeners had to rely on TPs alone. Following 12 minutes
of exposure to the artificial language speech stream,
participants carried out a forced choice lexical decision
task in which they had to decide which member of a pair of
words was a potential word from the language they heard.
Participants
The same participants took part in Experiment 3 as in
Experiments 1 and 2 above.
Stimuli
Table 5 provides the six trisyllabic words that were
concatenated to form the artificial speech stream. They
took the following forms: ((C)CV.(C)CV.(C)CV). Of
the six word forms, two had palatal sounds in initial
position, two had palatal sounds in the third syllable
and two had no palatal sounds at all. No palatalinitial syllables occurred in the medial syllable. In an
artificial speech segmentation task, the "words" are
contrasted with "nonwords" based upon the probability
of their syllable co-occurrence. For example, if the
listener hears the syllables [a] + [pi] + [nu] consistently together in the input stream, they have a transitional
probability (i.e., linear co-occurrence probability) of 1.0.
On the other hand, if the listener hears the syllables
[nu] + [f|u] + [li], these syllables never co-occur and
the probability drops to zero. Moreover, the probability
between of co-occurrence amongst the different word
forms themselves was .167, that is, the word forms were
combined in such a way that they only had a 1/6 chance of
occurring one after the other. All syllables respected the
phonotactic patterns of Spanish.
A native Mexican Spanish female speaker recorded
each syllable in isolation and then in bisyllabic and in
trisyllabic combinations. The dominant (") trochaic
stress pattern found in Spanish was maintained. To verify
that there were indeed differences between the stressed
and unstressed syllables, we conducted independent t-tests

[mi.f|a.je]
[mi.f|a.je]

[li.su.b|o]
[li.su.b|o]

[lu.b|e.ni]
[lu.b|e.ni]

[e.mu.po]
[je.mu.po]

[pi.nu.mi]
[pi.nu.mi]

[f|u.so.li]
[f|u.so.li]

on the pitch, intensity and duration of the vowels in the
stressed vs. unstressed syllables.4 Significant differences
emerged in all cases (p < .05), confirming that the stressed
syllables were in fact phonetically distinct from the
unstressed syllables. Since our goal was to have the
artificial speech stream resemble real speech as closely
as possible and also preserve the transitional information,
we had to shift the stress to different syllables for the
words not found in the speech stream as compared to the
real words. Crucially, no target or non-target word had
stressed palatal-initial syllables.
Some of the part-words did not occur in the speech
stream, which meant that listeners did not need to be
sensitive to TPs or phonotactics to correctly reject these
stimuli. However, their status as "new words" should lead
to an advantage for the occurring words as potential lexical
items heard in the input stream. To address possible effects
for this within and between groups, we conducted a mixed
ANOVA (part-word status x group) on the proportion of
correct rejections for the non-occurring part-words (vs.
the occurring part-words). The results revealed no main
effect for non-occurring part-words over the occurring
part-words (M = 0.55, F(1,5) = 1.02, p = .12) but did
reveal an almost significant difference between groups,
F(1,59) = 32.1, p = .061). There was no part-word status
group interaction observed. These results suggest that the
presence of some of the part-words in the input stream
did not give these items an advantage over the others. Part
of the reason for this may lie in the similarity between
the vowels in the occurring and non-occurring part-words.
The consonant onsets remained consistent and the only the
vowels were switched, which may have been perceivable
to the native Spanish speakers, who were listening in their
"native language" but passed unperceived (or unnoticed)
by the L2 listeners.
For the target word forms (high internal syllable
co-occurrence probabilities) the average duration was
582 ms. For the non-target words, the average duration
was 577 ms. The syllable with the affricate onset ([])
was 158 ms long and the affricate itself was 39 ms. The
fricative-initial syllable was 146 ms long and the fricative
4

We averaged the values for the two unstressed syllables.

214

Christine Shea and Jeffrey Renaud

Figure 3. (Colour online) Examples of stimuli used for Experiment 3.

Figure 4. Mean accuracy rates across groups and conditions for artificial speech segmentation task.

itself was 49 ms. In Figure 3 we provide a spectrogram of
the syllables with the target palatal segments.

not sure. The stimuli were presented in pairs using a
Macbook Pro computer running Superlab experimental
software. All trials were randomized; half the trials began
with the word taken from the artificial language stream.

Procedure
Participants were told they were going to listen to a new
variety of Spanish and they should simply listen to the
speech stream as closely as possible. To avoid possible
overanalysis of the input, subjects were given a sheet of
paper on which they were encouraged to draw or doodle.
Participants wore headphones during presentation and
testing. After the 12-minute exposure time, participants
carried out the forced choice test. They were told they
would hear pairs of words and had to choose which
one constituted an example of a possible word from
the language they just heard. Reponses were indicated
by means of pressing a button on a button box and
participants were encouraged to guess where they were

Results
Figure 4 shows participants' performance as accuracy
percentages, broken down by language group and
condition.
Performance accuracy for each group exceeded chance
(50%). Native Spanish speakers in the alternating
condition averaged 76% correct (SD = 1.2) and the
native Spanish speakers in the non-alternating condition
averaged 68% correct (SD = 0.98). For the L2 Spanish
group, accuracy reached 60% (SD = 0.6) for the
alternating condition and 58% (SD = 0.44) for the nonalternating condition.

Spanish palatal variants and L2 speech perception

215

alternating condition. This suggests that the learners may
be moving towards a more native-like pattern of sensitivity
to the variants.5
Discussion

Figure 5. Percentage correct for palatal words.

We carried out a two-way mixed ANOVA with group
(native Spanish vs. L2 Spanish) as the between-subjects
variable and condition (alternating vs. non-alternating)
as the within-subjects variable. Accuracy on the forced
choice task was the dependent variable. Results showed
a main effect for group, F(1,58) = 28.1, p < .001. There
was also a main effect for condition, F(1,58) = 12.3,
p < .001) and an interaction between group and condition,
F(1,55) = 9.1, p < .001). Given the interaction, we carried
out a Tukey's HSD and found that for the native Spanish
group, there was a significant difference between the two
conditions (p < .01) while for the L2 group, there was no
such difference.
These results suggest that the presence of the
allophonic palatal cue to word onset leads to more accurate
identification of words on the forced choice task for the
native Spanish listeners. For the L2 listeners, this result
did not reach significance, suggesting that the allophonic
benefit was weaker, if present at all.
In order to isolate potential effects for the allophone
onset, we examined accuracy rates for test items that
began with a palatal allophone. We hypothesized that
native Spanish speakers exposed to the alternation might
have higher accuracy rates for the trials that included
only palatal onset items (e.g., [ef|uso] (word) 
[jemupo] (nonword)). For the L2 listeners, we predicted
no significant difference. Figure 5 shows participants'
accuracy on test trials with palatal words only, broken
down by language group and condition.
We subsequently carried out a one-tailed independent
samples t-tests for each group on the palatal-initial
accuracy rates, which revealed a significant difference in
mean accuracy across the native Spanish speaker groups
in the two different conditions (t(27) = 6.64, p < .001).
For the L2 listeners, there was no significant difference
between the two conditions.
Greater variance was observed for the learners on
the affricate-initial words in the alternating condition,
as compared to the fricative-initial words in the non-

In Experiment 3, we showed that the extraction of
word forms by native Spanish listeners benefits from the
presence of the palatal allophonic cue to word onsets. This
result is consistent with previous research showing that the
TP-tracking mechanism in the input stream is rendered
more powerful when combined with language-specific
phonotactic information. The L2 Spanish listeners, on the
other hand, did not benefit as fully from the presence of
the affricate/stop onset.
In the artificial language segmentation task listeners
had to track transitional probabilities present in the
speech signal AND recognize language-specific allophonic
alternations that coincided with the TPs in indicating
word boundaries. Thus, language-specific allophonic
information reinforced the transitional probabilities,
which can be likened to the real-world task of segmenting
the speech stream where phonotactic cues and TPs reliably
coincide. Nonetheless, only the native Spanish speaker
group was helped by the presence of the language-specific
allophonic cue to word onsets. This suggests that while
listeners do not necessarily have to use both TPs and the
allophonic cue to segment the speech stream, the native
Spanish speakers alone benefitted from the mutually
reinforcing nature of these two cues to segmentation.
The L2 listeners do not appear to do so and instead
rely primarily upon the TPs. In order to benefit from the
presence of the palatal alternation in the segmentation
task, L2 listeners must be able to represent this knowledge
abstractly and use it to segment the artificial speech stream
in an on-line fashion. This suggests that the L2 listeners
may not be aware of the distributional information linked
to the affricate variant in (probabilistically) indicating
word onset in Spanish. To further explore this, we carried
out Experiment 4.
Experiment 4: Elision task using phonotactics
Experiment 4 uses an elision task to determine whether
words are recognized faster when they occur in a
phonotactically favored environment than when they
do not. Elision tasks are typically used to evaluate
phonological awareness in children learning to read.
Participants are given a word and asked to eliminate a
particular letter from it and say what word remains. In the
present case, listeners heard a nonword and had to strip
away a context syllable to identify the remaining word.
5

We thank an anonymous reviewer for pointing this out.

216

Christine Shea and Jeffrey Renaud

This task can be likened to a simplified version of wordspotting, which has been used in other research with more
advanced second language learners (see Weber and Cutler,
2006, for German and English).
In Experiment 4, participants were exposed to
context syllable+word combinations where the boundary
between the context syllable and the word was either
phonotactically highly probable or, conversely, highly
improbable. For example, the affricate version of the
palatal variant (or even the palatal occlusive []) occurs
after nasal consonants and the lateral [l]. Thus, when
listeners hear nonwords such as GLEN+llave "key" in
the form [glenae], they are predicted to strip away,
or elide, the context syllable and recognize llave more
quickly than if it took the form [glenae]. The nasal and
lateral-final context-syllables probabilistically condition
the more consonant-like version [] of the palatal variant
in the following word. Vowel-final context syllables, on
the other hand, favor the fricative in the onset.
Such phonotactic restrictions are not inviolable in
Spanish, as compared to, say, the well-known inviolable
constraint against [s]+obstruent clusters in onset position

skuela [skue.la] vs. escuela "school" [es.kue.la]. Instead,
the substitution of an unexpected allophone variant
is predicted to disrupt expectations regarding the
initial palatal allophone and lead to longer latencies.
Nonetheless, the recognition of the word itself should not
be impeded.
Participants
The same participants who took part in Experiments 1, 2
and 3 also took part in this experiment. The results from
one native Spanish and two L2 Spanish listeners were
eliminated because they neglected to register the moment
they recognized the embedded word and only wrote it on
their sheet of paper.
Stimuli
All items were recorded via a Sennheiser microphone
directly onto a PC computer. The speaker was a female
native Mexican Spanish speaker, instructed to avoid any
clear syllable boundaries in her productions.
Participants were exposed to 60 context syllable +
target word combinations and 60 filler items. The 12
target words had a palatal target sound in onset position
and were taken from a corpus of the 5000 most common
words in Spanish (Davies, 2005) or from the first-year
Spanish textbook used by the L1 English/L2 Spanish
participants. The 60 filler items were among the 1000
most frequent Spanish words, according to Davies (2005)
and, moreover, were taught as vocabulary items in the
first eight chapters of the Spanish language textbook used
in the university language program followed by the L2

participants. As Weber and Cutler (2006, p. 598) note,
word frequency counts may not reflect the experience of
L1 and L2 listeners in the same way; however, when the
manipulation of interest is carried out within items, this
problem is alleviated.
While all five vowels can occur in open syllables in
Spanish, coronal consonants are much more frequent
in coda position compared to consonants at other
places of articulation (with exceptions mostly found in
borrowings and learned Latinisms). Yet this tendency is
not categorical, as a reviewer notes that labial and velar
coda segments are possible; the reviewer lists: ca[p.s]ula
"capsule", ca[p.t1]ar "to capture", a[k.s]ion "action",
e[k.s]ito "success", a[k.t1]o "act", corre[k.t1]o "correct",
pa[k.t1]ar "to agree on", a[.n]ostico "agnostic",
i[.n]icion "ignition", i[.n]ominia "disgrace", i[.n]orar
"to ignore" and ma[.n]animidad "magnanimity". (To
complete the paradigm, voiced labial codas such
as a[.s]urdo "absurd" might be included.)6 Within
words, in non-velarizing dialects, target nasals in coda
position assimilate place of articulation to the following
consonant.
In terms of nasal consonants, most varieties of
Spanish exhibit neutralization whereby nasals in wordfinal position are realized as either the alveolar [n] or the
velar [N]. Within words, in non-velarizing dialects target
nasals in coda position assimilate place of articulation to
the following consonant. We did not use any syllables with
final [s] because of the high tendency for that segment
to undergo either deletion or aspiration across Spanish
dialects. In contrast to the nasal segments, [s] can be elided
completely in certain varieties.
In Spanish, the palatal segment in word onset or
medial position can be represented orthographically by
the letter y (yema "eggyolk") or, alternatively, by ll
(llama "call"). Another way this sound is represented
orthographically is by means of the combination hiV,
as in hielo "ice" or hierro "iron". Three of our test
items exhibited this particular orthographic combination.
According to Hualde (2005), Spanish speakers typically
pronounce the first two orthographic patterns with the
affricate when it occurs in the correct phonotactic context
(after a pause or after a lateral/nasal segment) but
6

However, we would like to point out that the list does not constitute
a counterexample to the claims that (a) codas TEND to be coronal,
and (b) most exceptions are found in borrowings, as each example
above is itself a learned word borrowed from Classical Latin.
This is evinced by the maintenance of consonant clusters that
were reduced or otherwise modified (via sound change) in the
patrimonial lexicon of Spanish: CAPSA [p.s] > caja [x] "box",
CAPT ARE [p.t1] > catar "to look at", LACTEM [k.t1] > leche [tS]
"milk", SIGNU [g.n] > sena [] "sign". Furthermore, such words are
subject to synchronic simplification, often undergoing vocalization
(a[u.s]urdo < a[.s]urdo, corre[i.t1]o < corre[k.t1]o; see Pineros, 2001)
or elision (a[s]ion < a[k.s]ion; Pharies, 2007) in casual speech,
demonstrating their vulnerability.

Spanish palatal variants and L2 speech perception

217

Figure 6. (Colour online) Examples of stimuli used for Experiment 4.

when the orthographic combination hiV occurs at the
beginning of a word, speakers typically produce it more
like the palatal fricative or even a glide, attributable to
orthographic effects that manifest phonetically. For the
present experiment, this meant that the three test items
with hiV in initial position could potentially be recognized
faster in the non-alternating condition because the palatal
segment tends to be pronounced as a fricative rather than
the affricate. In Figure 6 we present examples of the
stimuli used for Experiment 4.
We selected six context syllable templates (initial
syllables) that were subsequently combined with the target
words and fillers. Table 6 presents the initial context
syllables used with the target words.
We selected bisyllabic trochees, which, when
combined with the context syllables, gave the trisyllabic
form ("). Thus, in addition to whatever phonotactic
and allophonic cues are available in the input, listeners
could also take advantage of primary stress cues.
In Spanish, between 75% and 80% of words follow
the trochaic stress pattern (Harris, 1983; Quilis,
1984); specifically, penultimate (medial) stress accounts
for 73.52% of trisyllabic words (LEXESP database:
Sebastian-Galles, Marti, Carreiras & Cuetos, 2000). In
sum, the trochaic/penultimate stress pattern comprises
nearly three-fourths of the Spanish lexicon. For English,
Clopper (2002) analyzed tokens from the Hoosier Mental
Lexicon (Luce & Pisoni, 1998) and found that threesyllable words in English exhibit primary stress most
frequently on either the first or second syllable. However,
when the type frequency for both accentual patterns is
divided by the token frequency, second syllable stress
is more common. Thus, based upon the distribution of
stress patterns across the English lexicon, native speakers
expect to encounter primary stress most often on the
second syllable of three-syllable words, followed by the
first syllable. Of the 12 context syllables that occur with
the target items, four are vowel-final, four are lateral-

final and four are nasal-final. To avoid possible priming
effects, we presented each word only once to the listeners,
which was necessary given the relatively small number of
possible and appropriate target items.
In this experiment we are testing linear phonotactic
knowledge as well as lexical recognition in favorable
vs. unfavorable contexts. If listeners recognize the
phonotactic information regarding the expected context
for each palatal variant and use this to activate their
expectation regarding the palatal segment in the onset of
the following word, there should be a significant difference
between the alternating vs. non-alternating conditions.
Using this type of elision task allows us to test the
effect for linear phonotactic context and the knowledge
listeners have of these expected contextual variants. The
predictability of the context syllable in terms of length and
boundary location does not interfere with the conclusion
that phonotactic knowledge is involved in spotting the
words.
We also conducted a small-scale control experiment
to guarantee that our stimuli could be identified correctly
without the context syllables. Following Weber and Cutler
(2006), we presented three native Spanish and ten L1
English/L2 Spanish listeners with twenty-two items, ten
of which were taken from the experimental fillers plus the
12 experimental items themselves. For the experimental
items, we excised the context syllables and presented half
with the fricative onset and half with the stop/affricate
onset. The fillers were presented with their context
syllables. Listeners were asked to press a button whenever
they heard a Spanish word and subsequently write it down
on a sheet of paper. The native Spanish speakers reached
100% accuracy (22/22, 12/12 on the target items) and
a paired sample t-test revealed no significant differences
among participants between target items and fillers with
the context syllable (t(11) = 0.82, p > .05) in terms of
response latencies; nor were there significant differences
between the fricative onset and stop/affricate onset RTs,

218

Christine Shea and Jeffrey Renaud
Table 6. Context syllables and lexical items for elision elision task.
Context
syllable
glenkrolononsansobrase-

llllave
"key"
llego
"arrive"
llora
"cry"
llanta
"tire"
llenas
"fill"
llama
"call"
lleva
"carry"
lluvia
"rain"

Context
syllable

hie-

ol-

hierro
"steel"

grel-

hierba
"grass"

pral-

hielo
"ice"

either (t(11) = 0.71, p > .05). The L1 English/L2 Spanish
listeners reached 90% accuracy (average 20.2/22, 10.8/12
on target items) on the excised target items and 100%
correct on the filler items. A paired sample t-test revealed
significant differences between the excised target items
and the embedded filler items, with the latter latencies
being longer (t(11) = 2.31, p < .05). Given these results
on the control task, we can safely assume that both the
native Spanish and the L1 English/L2 Spanish groups are
able to identify the target items with their context syllables
excised and can identify the filler items embedded in their
context syllables.
Procedure
The stimuli were presented in pairs using a Macbook Pro
computer via Superlab experimental software. All trials
were randomized. Participants were told they would hear
nonwords in Spanish in which real words were embedded.
They were to listen and as soon as they detected the real
word, they were to press the corresponding button on the
button box. They then had to write the real word down on a
sheet of paper provided by the experimenter. Participants
had four seconds to respond, after which the following
item was presented. They were given four practice items
that did not occur among the filler or experimental trials.
Results
We predicted that the different boundaries between
the context syllable and target words would have an

Context
syllable

prel-

y-

yema
"yolk"

effect on how quickly these words are recognized by
listeners. Furthermore, we predicted that there would be
an interaction between boundary and group. Specifically,
following the results in the artificial speech segmentation
task, native Spanish speakers exposed to target items
with the stop/affricate variant in onset position should
have shorter latencies than those exposed to target items
with the fricative variant. For the L1 English/L2 Spanish
group, on the other hand, we do not expect to find
any significant differences in latencies or accuracy rates
across the two types of input. In Table 7 we present the
means and standard deviations for each group across each
condition. RT latencies were calculated from the target
word onset.7 No significant differences emerged across or
within groups for accuracy.
We carried out a three-way mixed ANOVA on the
latencies, with group and condition as the betweensubjects factors and context syllable as the withinsubjects factor. There was a main effect for group (the
native Spanish speakers were faster overall than the
L2 group, F(1,55) = 19.2, p < .001. There was also a
main effect for condition, F(1,55) = 10.2, p < .01), due
to the faster reaction times for both groups on the
alternating condition. Finally, there was also a main
effect for context syllable, F(1,55) = 18.3, p < .001.
There was also a significant group, condition and
7

A reviewer points out that the context syllables varied in length,
which may have affected the RT latencies. However, since the
variability occurred across both alternating and non-alternating
contexts, possible effects would be the same across both conditions.

Spanish palatal variants and L2 speech perception
Table 7. LogRT means (ms) and SD for elision task
conditions.
Context syllable

Native Spanish
Alternating
Non-Alternating
L2 Spanish
Alternating
Non-Alternating

(C)CV(se-lluvia)

VC[l]/[n](C)CV[l]/[n](ol-hierro)
(on-llanta)

Overall
mean

2.83
2.88

2.77
2.94

2.79
2.93

2.86
2.94

2.94
3.1

2.92
3.02

219

difference for the vowel boundary context syllable across
the alternating/non-alternating condition (t(27) = 0.780,
p = .445). However, there was a significant difference for
the nasal boundary context (t(27) = 4.96, p < .001) and
an almost significant difference for the lateral context
(t(27) = 3.137, p = .002). For the L2 Spanish group, a
significant difference emerged for the lateral (t(27) = 2.56,
p = .012) and nasal boundary contexts (t(27) = 2.16,
p = .009)as well, with no significant difference across
the alternating/non-alternating conditions for the vowel
boundary items (t(27) = 2.187, p = .04).
Discussion

Figure 7. Average LogRT for each group across conditions
for Experiment 4.

context-syllable interaction, F(1,55) = 12.8, p < .01. In
Figure 7 we present graphs of the results.
Given that our hypothesis was related to group differences across the alternating/non-alternating condition,
we followed up the significant three-way interaction with a
series of t-tests for each group, comparing the condition x
context syllable (lateral/nasal or vowel-final). Tests of the
three a priori hypotheses were conducted using Bonferroni
adjusted alpha levels of .0167 per test (.05/3).For
the native Spanish listeners, there was no significant

The question addressed by Experiment 4 was whether the
type of context syllable boundary would lead listeners to
expect a certain palatal variant in the onset of the lexical
item and if so, whether this effect would hold across
the two groups of listeners. The significant interaction
between context syllable and group suggests that our
overall prediction held. There is a significant advantage
for native Spanish speakers on the elision task when
the embedded word occurs in a phonotactically expected
context. After comparing within-group differences across
the two conditions, we found that the L2 listeners followed
the native Spanish speakers with longer latencies in the
phonotactically disfavored context.
In this experiment, we examined the effect of linear
phonotactic context on an elision task, using the same
variant examined in the three previous experiments. Our
results generally support those of Weber and Cutler
(2006), albeit with a slightly different methodology.
Specifically, Weber and Cutler found that phonotacticallyexpected word onsets were recognized faster than those
which violated the phonotactics of the L2 (and L1
in Weber & Cutler). In our case, none of the stimuli
violated English phonotactics (given that the closest
English categories are not predictably distributed) but did
require knowledge of probabilistic nature of the palatal
variants in Spanish. Another important difference is that
the target sounds in our study occur in probabilistic -
not absolute - distributions. In the Weber and Cutler
study, the phonotactically expected word onsets were
categorically correct or incorrect. Thus, our results add
to those of Weber and Cutler by showing that learners are
also sensitive to allophonic information in the L2 when
carrying out an elision task, suggesting that learners are
tracking this information at some level.
The finding that L2 listeners are able to use this
information to identify words more quickly in favorable
contexts suggests that adult second language learners
are sensitive to linear phonotactic restrictions in their
second language. However, when these same listeners
were exposed to the artificial speech stream in Experiment
3, they did not benefit from this knowledge. Added to this

220

Christine Shea and Jeffrey Renaud

are the results from Experiments 1 and 2 where the L2
Spanish listeners rated the sounds differently and then
were unsuccessful in discriminating between them on a
subsequent speeded AX task. In sum, it was only on
Experiment 4, the elision task, where the L2 listeners'
results aligned with those of the native Spanish listeners.
Thus, we are left with the issue of how best to account for
the differences across the distinct tasks. We turn to this in
the discussion section.
General discussion and conclusions
In this study we presented four experiments that examined
how native Spanish and L2 Spanish listeners perceive
and use the Spanish palatal obstruent variants across
a series of speech tasks. In Experiment 1, we showed
that when asked to rate stimuli that contrasted only in
the palatal variant, the native Spanish speakers rated the
stimuli as more similar than the L2 learners. Moreover,
we observed a significant difference between positions
for these effects. Intriguingly, the native Spanish listeners
rated the palatal variants as more "different" in onset
position than in medial position. These results suggest
that native language sound categories (both contrastive
and non-contrastive) and the distributional information
linked to each sound modulate the way listeners judge
the similarity of sounds. In Experiment 2, listeners heard
pairs of non-words and had to judge whether they were the
same or different, under strict time pressure. Again, the
results point towards a native-language effect even at lowlevel phonetic perception (see Babel & Johnson, 2010, for
a similar result).
The results from the artificial speech segmentation task
suggest that L2 Spanish learners do not benefit from the
presence of the palatal alternation when segmenting an
input stream. It is possible that L2 listeners are either
not aware of the distributional information linked to the
palatal alternation in the input or are potentially aware of
it but unable to draw upon it when completing the task.
When considered in the light of the elision task results, the
latter explanation seems to be the most likely: L2 listeners
ARE indeed sensitive to the presence of the stop/affricate
allophone in onset position when it occurs at the start of
a real word in a phonotactically-likely context. Together,
these experiments provide a mixed picture in terms of how
Spanish L2 listeners use the palatal allophone alternation
to carry out tasks in their second language. The results
further suggest that the functional role of native-language
speech categories influences the perception of second
language sounds and task effects play a role in the degree
to which these effects play out. The question that naturally
falls out from this is what prevents learners from accessing
information consistently?
One way of accounting for this may be that learner
representations are veridical in the sense of storing

detailed information present in the signal, but this
information may not be consistently available across all
task conditions, unlike in the case of native speakers (see
Shea & Curtin, 2010, 2011, for similar conclusions).
This may be the result of a type of attentional filter
operating on L2 speech perception that prevents learners
from accessing all the information they may have stored.
Another possible explanation is that learners have not
yet generalized across the input to form robust abstract
representations. The L2 learners did not benefit from the
palatal alternation when segmenting the artificial speech
stream, which suggests that they may not have abstract
representations of the alternations. In this task, learners
did not have the advantage of phonotactic context to assist
them with segmenting the input nor did they have the
advantage of real words to trigger lexical recognition, as
was the case in Experiment 4.
In speech perception research it is now accepted that
distributional learning drives speech category learning.
Nonetheless, it is not yet well understood how attention
may drive (or not) distributional learning and how
previous learning may interfere with it. We showed
that adult L2 learners are sensitive to distributional
information in the speech stream (Experiment 4) but
cannot necessarily access it under all tasks (Experiments 1
and 3). In conclusion, this study demonstrated the complex
nature of the interplay between language-specific relations
of contrast and task effects.
References
Aguilar Cuevas, L. (1997). De la vocal a la consonante. Ph.D.
dissertation, Universidad de Santiago de Compostela.
Alvar, M. (ed.) (1996). Manual de dialectologia hispanica: el
espanol de Espana. Barcelona: Editorial Ariel.
Campos-Astorkiza, R. (2012). The phonemes of Spanish. In J.-I.
Hualde, A. Olarrea & E. O'Rourke (eds.), The handbook of
Hispanic Linguistics (vol. 69), pp. 89-100. Malden, MA:
Blackwell
Babel, M., & Johnson, K. (2010). Accessing psycho-acoustic
perception and language-specific perception with speech
sounds. Journal of Laboratory Phonology, 1, 179-205.
Boomershine, A., Hall, K. C., Hume, E., & Johnson, K.
(2008). The impact of allophony vs. contrast on speech
perception. In P. Avery, E. Dresher & K. Rice (eds.),
Contrast in phonology, pp. 143-172. New York: Mouton de
Gruyter.
Cho, T. (2001). Effects of morpheme boundaries on gestural
timing: Evidence from Korean. Phonetica, 58, 129-162.
Clopper, C. (2002). Frequency of stress patterns in English: A
computational analysis. IULC Working Papers Online, 2.
www.indiana.edu/iulcwp/contents.cgi?which=2.
Davies, M. (2005). A frequency dictionary of Spanish: Core
vocabulary for learners. New York: Routledge.
Dupoux, E., Pallier, C., Sebastian-Galles, N., & Mehler, J.
(1997). A distressing "deafness" in French? Journal of
Memory and Language, 36, 406-421.

Spanish palatal variants and L2 speech perception
Finn, A., & Hudson Kam, C. (2008). The curse of knowledge:
First language knowledge impairs adult learners' use of
novel statistics for word segmentation. Cognition, 108,
477-499.
Fougeron, C., & Keating, P. (1997). Articulatory strengthening
at edges of prosodic domain. Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 106, 3728-3740.
Gebhart, A., Aslin, R., & Newport, E. (2009). Changing
structures in midstream: Learning along the statistical
garden path. Cognitive Science, 33, 1087-1116.
Gordon, M. (1997). Syllable weight and the phonetics/phonology interface. Berkeley Linguistics Society, 23,
111-122.
Harris, J. (1983). Syllable structure and stress in Spanish: A
nonlinear analysis. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Holt, L. L., & Lotto, A. J. (2006). Cue weighting in auditory
categorization: Implications for first and second language
acquisition. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
119, 3059-3071.
Hualde, J.-I. (2004). Quasi-phonemic contrasts in Spanish. In
V. Chand, A. Kelleher, A. J. Rodriguez & B. Schmeiser
(eds.), Proceedings of the 23rd West Coast Conference
on Formal Linguistics, pp. 374-398. Somerville, MA:
Cascadilla Press.
Hualde, J.-I. (2005). Sounds of Spanish. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Jimenez Sabater, M. (1975). Mas datos sobre el espanol en la
Republica Dominicana. Santo Domingo: Ediciones Intec.
Johnson, K., & Babel, M. (2010). On the perceptual basis
of distinctive features: Evidence from the perception of
fricatives by Dutch and English speakers. Journal of
Phonetics, 38, 127-136.
Kenstowicz, M. (1994). Base-Identity and Uniform Exponence:
Alternatives to cyclicity. Rutgers Optimality Archive [ROA
103].
Lipski (1990). Aspects of Ecuadoran vowel reduction. Hispanic
Linguistics, 4, 1-19.
Lope Blanch, J. (1989). La complejidad dialectal de Mexico
(Estudios de linguistica hispanoamericana 1410158).
Mexico: Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico.
Lope Blanch, J. (1996). Mexico. In Alvar (ed.), pp. 81-89.
Luce, P. A., & Pisoni, D. B. (1998). Recognizing spoken words:
The neighborhood activation model. Ear and Hearing, 19,
1-36. Martin
Butragueno, P. (forthcoming). Estructura del yeismo en la
geografia fonica de Mexico. In R. Gomez & I. Molina

221

(eds.), El yeismo en el mundo hispanico. Madrid:
Iberoamericana Verveurt.
Martinez Celdran, E. (2008). Some chimeras of traditional
Spanish phonetics. In L. Colantoni & J. Steele (eds.),
Selected Proceedings of the 3rd Conference on Laboratory
Approaches to Spanish Phonology, pp. 32-46. Somerville,
MA: Cascadilla Press.
Martinez Celdran, E., & Fernandez Planas, A. (2007). Manual
de fonetica Espanola. Barcelona: Editorial Ariana.
Pharies, D. A. (2007). A brief history of the Spanish language.
Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press.
Pierrehumbert, J. (2006). The statistical basis of an unnatural
alternation. In L. Goldstein, D. H. Whalen & C. Best (eds.),
Laboratory phonology 8, pp. 81-107. Berlin: Mouton de
Gruyter.
Pineros, C.-E. (2009). Estructura de los sonidos de espanol.
Saddle River, NY: Prentice Hall.
Pineros, C.-E. (2001). Segment-to-syllable alignment and
vocalization in Chilean Spanish. Lingua, 111, 163-188.
Quilis, A. (1984). Metrica espanola. Barcelona: Ariel.
Saffran, J., Aslin, R., & Newport, E. (1996). Statistical learning
by 8-month-old infants. Science, 274, 1926-1928.
Sebastian-Galles, N., Marti, M. A., Carreiras, M., & Cuetos,
F. (2000). LEXESP: Lexico informatizado del espanol.
Barcelona: Ediciones Universitat de Barcelona.
Shea, C., & Curtin, S. (2010). Discovering the relationship
between context and allophones in a second language:
Evidence for distribution-based learning. Studies in Second
Language Acquisition, 32, 581-606.
Shea, C., & Curtin, S. (2011). Experience, representations and
the production of second language allophones. Second
Language Research, 27, 229-250.
Sundara, M. (2005). Acoustic-phonetics of coronal stops: A
cross-language study of Canadian English & Canadian
French. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 118,
1026-1037.
Tyler, M., & Cutler, A. (2009). Cross-language differences in
cue use for speech segmentation. Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 126, 367-376.
Weber, A., & Cutler, A. (2006). First-language phonotactics
in second-language listening. Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 119, 597-607.
Weiss, D., Gerfen, C., & Mitchel, A. (2009). Speech
segmentation in a simulated bilingual environment: A
challenge of statistical learning? Language Learning and
Development, 5, 30-49.

