Journal of Memory and Language 103 (2018) 191-209

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Memory and Language
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jml

Linguistic expectation management in online discourse processing: An
investigation of Dutch inderdaad 'indeed' and eigenlijk 'actually'

T



Geertje van Bergena, , Hans Rutger Boskerb
a
b

Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Neurobiology of Language Department, Wundtlaan 1, 6525 XD Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Psychology of Language Department, Wundtlaan 1, 6525 XD Nijmegen, The Netherlands

A R T I C LE I N FO

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Discourse particles
Discourse processing
Dialogue
Polyfunctionality
Visual world eye-tracking

Interpersonal discourse particles (DPs), such as Dutch inderdaad (`indeed') and eigenlijk (`actually') are
highly frequent in everyday conversational interaction. Despite extensive theoretical descriptions of their
polyfunctionality, little is known about how they are used by language comprehenders. In two visual world eyetracking experiments involving an online dialogue completion task, we asked to what extent inderdaad, confirming an inferred expectation, and eigenlijk, contrasting with an inferred expectation, influence real-time understanding of dialogues. Answers in the dialogues contained a DP or a control adverb, and a critical discourse
referent was replaced by a beep; participants chose the most likely dialogue completion by clicking on one of
four referents in a display. Results show that listeners make rapid and fine-grained situation-specific inferences
about the use of DPs, modulating their expectations about how the dialogue will unfold. Findings further specify
and constrain theories about the conversation-managing function and polyfunctionality of DPs.

Introduction
Some languages are equipped with specific linguistic tools to respond to contextual expectations, as illustrated in the following constructed Dutch dialogue:
(1)

A

Het was vast prachtig weer in Griekenland?
The weather must have been great in Greece?
B
We hebben inderdaad alleen maar zon gehad.
We have [indeed] had nothing but sun.
B
We hebben eigenlijk alleen maar regen gehad.
We have [actually] had nothing but rain.
In these utterances, inderdaad (`indeed') and eigenlijk (`actually, in
fact') respond to the expectation raised by A's suggestive question: they
mark either a match (inderdaad) or a mismatch (eigenlijk) between what
B says and what A expects B to say. The current study investigates effects of such linguistic expectation-managing devices on online discourse comprehension.
Expectation-managing discourse particles
Inderdaad and eigenlijk are discourse particles (DPs), a subset of the
broad category of discourse markers. Discourse markers are linguistic
elements that encode a relation between their host utterance and the


surrounding discourse situation (e.g., Fischer, 2006; Fraser, 1999;
Schiffrin, 1987), and typically occur in highly dynamic, interactive
contexts. They are syntactically flexible, in the sense that they can fall
both within and outside the grammatical structure of the sentence (e.g.,
we hebben alleen maar zon gehad, inderdaad `we have had nothing but
sun, [indeed]'). Moreover, they are syntactically optional, such that
they can be left out of a sentence without violating its grammaticality
(for instance, the answers in (1) would be syntactically well-formed
without the DPs). Because of their extra- or a-grammatical status, discourse markers have long been regarded as meaningless verbal fillers
not warranting linguistic investigation. However, a large body of research over the last three decades has revealed that they are "communicatively obligatory" (Diewald, 2010), and that their use requires
sophisticated communicative knowledge (for reviews, see e.g., Degand,
Cornillie, & Pietrandrea, 2013; Fischer, 2014; Fraser, 1999; Maschler &
Schiffrin, 2015; Schiffrin, 1987).
From a semantics/pragmatics perspective, inderdaad and eigenlijk
can be analyzed as conventional implicature triggers (e.g., Grice, 1975;
Levinson, 1979; Potts, 2007) or "invited inferences" (Traugott &
Dasher, 2002). Like presuppositions and entailments, conventional
implicatures are inferences that are part of a lexical or constructional
meaning. However, in contrast to presuppositions and entailments, they
are independent from the at-issue content of the utterance ("what is
said") (for discussion, see Potts, 2015). Conventional implicatures are

Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: Geertje.vanBergen@mpi.nl (G. van Bergen), HansRutger.Bosker@mpi.nl (H.R. Bosker).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2018.08.004
Received 21 February 2018; Received in revised form 10 August 2018
Available online 06 September 2018
0749-596X/ (c) 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Journal of Memory and Language 103 (2018) 191-209

G. van Bergen, H.R. Bosker

conversation: for instance, if someone told you de wereld is eigenlijk rond
`the world is actually round', this message may come across as pejorative.
In sum, eigenlijk and inderdaad are overt linguistic indices of the
speaker's pragmatic inferences about their addressee's linguistic,
structural, cognitive and/or social beliefs about the discourse. The
central question addressed in this paper is whether and how quickly this
inferred content becomes available to the comprehender during incremental language comprehension, which is a hotly debated issue in experimental pragmatics (for reviews, see e.g., Grodner, Klein, Carbary, &
Tanenhaus, 2010; Hagoort & Levinson, 2014; Huang & Snedeker,
2018). To our knowledge, this is the first study to investigate effects of
such intersubjective markers on online dialogue processing.

highly context-dependent: the particular meaning they express is highly
variable, and strongly influenced by the speaker's communicative goal
as well as the nature of the surrounding discourse content (Potts, 2015,
p. 30). Given this context-dependent nature of conventional implicatures, inderdaad and eigenlijk are notoriously polyfunctional: they
can express multiple relations with linguistic, structural, cognitive and/
or social characteristics of the discourse (e.g., Fischer, 2014; Maschler &
Schiffrin, 2015). For instance, in example (1) above, inderdaad and eigenlijk mark a relation between the utterance in which they occur and
some expectation that can be inferred from the question. Such an expectation can be based on various discourse aspects, e.g., the visual
context (e.g., if one looks tanned, one has likely been exposed to a lot of
sun), world knowledge (if one goes to Greece, one may expect good
weather), but also the linguistic or the social context.
At the same time, DPs can apply to various levels of information
expressed in their host utterance. For instance, if a child asks his mother
for a piece of kommer "cumber" and his mother replies het is eigenlijk
"komkommer" (it is [actually] "cucumber"), she uses eigenlijk to mark a
mismatch between her own knowledge and her child's expectation
about this word's pronunciation that can be inferred from the child's
question. Another example: if two people are greatly enjoying themselves at a party, and one of them asks hoe laat is het eigenlijk? (what
time is it [actually]?), eigenlijk is used to mark a contrast between the
questioner's speech act (asking for the time) and the inference that you
don't keep track of time if you are having fun (van Bergen, van Gijn,
Hogeweg, & Lestrade, 2011). The interlocutor could respond to this
question by saying we moeten inderdaad maar eens naar huis gaan ('We
should [indeed] head home'), inderdaad marking a match between the
responder's intention to go home and the communicative intention of
the questioner that can be implied from the speech act. In the theoretical literature, there is general agreement that all different interpretations of an individual discourse marker share a common core
meaning (also referred to as generic, abstract, underspecified or underlying
meaning; see e.g., Fischer, 2006; Fox Tree & Schrock, 2002). Similarly,
we assume a high degree of relatedness between all different interpretations of inderdaad and eigenlijk, respectively: the former commonly
marking affirmative/confirmatory discourse relations, the latter generally marking adversative/contrastive discourse relations (see also van
Bergen et al., 2011; Mortier & Degand, 2009).
Together with this array of discourse-structuring functions, inderdaad and eigenlijk crucially express interpersonal or intersubjective
relations: they manage the cognitive and/or social coordination between the speaker and the addressee or addressee's face (e.g., Traugott,
2010; Verhagen, 2005). In this sense, inderdaad and eigenlijk encode a
relation between the (assumed) discourse models of the speaker and the
addressee. With inderdaad, the speaker marks a match between his own
model of the discourse and her addressee's discourse model: it can be
seen as an overt linguistic marker of common ground ("we think
alike"). With eigenlijk, the speaker marks a contrast between her addressee's discourse model and her own discourse model. Thus, eigenlijk
can be regarded a linguistic marker of privileged ground ("I know
something you don't know"). In addition, eigenlijk requires an incorporation of the speech partner's discourse model into one's own
discourse model: it expresses that the hearer's expectation is false, but
plausible given both speech partners' shared beliefs ("on the basis of
our shared knowledge, you couldn't have known what I know") (see
van Bergen et al., 2011, for an extensive analysis). This additional
meaning aspect of eigenlijk serves a socio-pragmatic goal: the overt
acknowledgement of the addressee's perspective on the discourse can be
employed as a face saving-strategy in conversational interaction.
Whereas speakers generally assume that their conventional implicatures will be uncontroversial (Potts, 2015), note that inderdaad and
eigenlijk express subjective, speaker-based assumptions about the addressee's inferred expectations, which need not be in line with the addressee's actual expectations. Assuming too much or too little about
your interlocutor's beliefs can have social consequences in

Discourse markers and discourse processing
Although the number of linguistic analyses of discourse markers has
exploded over the last 30 years, relatively little is known about the
function of discourse markers in real-time language understanding. In
functional approaches, discourse markers are assumed to serve as
conversation-managing devices (e.g., Aijmer, 2002; Fischer, 2014; Fox
Tree, 2010; Schiffrin, 1987; Smith & Jucker, 2002); that is, they "encode information that is necessary in order to constrain or guide the
interpretation process" (Aijmer & Simon-Vandenbergen, 2004, pp.
1784). However, considering that language comprehension is a complex, incremental, and combinatorial process, such a theoretical claim
lacks empirical evidence as well as specificity with respect to the stage
of the interpretation process that would be constrained or guided.
Empirical evidence for their conversation-managing function comes
from psycholinguistic investigations of textual discourse connectives, a
subset of discourse markers encoding coherence relations between
discourse segments. Explicit marking of how two discourse segments
should be temporally or causally related has been shown to facilitate
processing of subsequent discourse segments (e.g., temporal connectives, Nieuwland, 2015; Politzer-Ahles, Xiang, & Almeida, 2017;
causal connectives, e.g., Canestrelli, Mak, & Sanders, 2012; Cozijn,
Commandeur, Vonk, & Noordman, 2011; Koornneef & Sanders, 2013;
concessive connectives, Xiang & Kuperberg, 2015; and contrastive
connectives, Drenhaus, Demberg, Kohne, & Delogu, 2014; Scholman,
Rohde, & Demberg, 2017). Other evidence for the facilitating role of
discourse markers in online discourse understanding comes from research on focus particles, encoding a relationship between a focused
element and its implied alternatives (e.g., Gerwien & Rudka, in press;
Kim, Gunlogson, Tanenhaus, & Runner, 2015; Sedivy, 2002).
Whereas the above studies show that some discourse markers can
affect online language comprehension beyond the sentence level, none
of these studies involved conversational discourse, which is the typical
environment of interpersonal DPs in natural language. Linguistic elements that typically occur in conversational interaction and that have
been studied experimentally are fillers, such as disfluencies (e.g., uh,
uhm), repairs (e.g., oh, I mean) and backchannels (e.g., mhm, uhuh,
really, oh). A range of psycholinguistic studies has shown that fillers can
modulate listeners' expectations about, and/or facilitate processing of,
upcoming input (e.g., Arnold, Hudson Kam, & Tanenhaus, 2007;
Bosker, Quene, Sanders, & de Jong, 2014; Corley, MacGregor, &
Donaldson, 2007; Corley, 2010; Fox Tree, 2001; Fox Tree & Schrock,
1999; Lowder & Ferreira, 2016). Various scholars argue that fillers also
have a conversation-managing function. For instance, Clark and Fox
Tree (2002) have proposed that speakers use disfluencies to announce
expected upcoming delays in speech to their addressee. However, this
delay-signaling function remains controversial (see e.g., Finlayson &
Corley, 2012; Schegloff 2010); others have for instance argued that
their facilitating effect on language processing may be better explained
as a side effect of speech planning difficulty (e.g., Corley & Stewart,
2008). Regardless of their assumed function, however, there is a crucial
difference between disfluencies, repairs and backchannels on the one
192

Journal of Memory and Language 103 (2018) 191-209

G. van Bergen, H.R. Bosker

inferred expectation about a discourse referent, but also about a phoneme, an event structure or a speech act. We presented participants
with a referential contrast in the visual context, by which we strongly
constrained, but still allowed for variation in, potential dialogue interpretations. A more traditional paradigm (i.e., clicking on a mentioned referent) would be able to investigate how participants arrive at
a specific referential interpretation of DPs, which itself is an important
and highly relevant question. However, our main research question is
how comprehenders interpret such inherently polyfunctional cues to
begin with, which is as of yet unknown. Moreover, an experimental
design that only allows for referential DP interpretations could induce
an unnatural interpretation bias, thereby decreasing the ecological
validity of the experiments. By investigating click-contingent gaze
patterns, we will still be able to assess how listeners arrive at a referential DP interpretation without enforcing this specific interpretation.
We assumed that upon encountering inderdaad or eigenlijk (relative
to a control adverb), listeners would differentially update their beliefs
about how the dialogue would continue. As discussed above, eigenlijk
signals misalignment between what speakers say and what they assume
their addressee to expect. From a processing perspective, we hypothesized that eigenlijk functions as a warning signal to the comprehender
about an upcoming unexpected discourse continuation. In this sense,
effects of eigenlijk may resemble the effects of contrastive discourse
connectives and disfluencies on online language processing: eigenlijk is
hypothesized to signal the unexpectedness of some aspect of the unfolding dialogue. It is less clear what the effect of inderdaad will be on
listeners' online dialogue understanding. Upon encountering inderdaad,
there may be no reason for the listener to change her expectations about
the unfolding dialogue, as her discourse model was already established
before encountering the linguistic confirmation. Alternatively, listeners
could use the linguistic confirmation to strengthen their beliefs about
the most likely discourse continuation. This may yield a reduction of
cognitive resources spent on distributing probabilities over multiple
alternative dialogue continuations during listening.
The basic meanings of inderdaad and eigenlijk arguably differ in
terms of communicative utility. From a processing perspective, a
warning signal for any upcoming unexpectedness (eigenlijk) is likely
more beneficial to the comprehender than a confirmation of an already
established expectation (inderdaad). Taking frequency of occurrence as
a proxy for communicative utility, this difference between inderdaad
and eigenlijk is reflected in natural language: in the Corpus Gesproken
Nederlands (Corpus of Spoken Dutch; Oostdijk, 2000), a collection of
1000 h of contemporary Dutch speech, eigenlijk occurs about 3.5 times
more often than inderdaad. Taking a subcorpus of approximately 1000
spontaneously produced dyadic conversations between peers, eigenlijk
occurs about twenty times per 10,000 words, whereas inderdaad occurs
roughly seven times per 10,000 words. Based on this difference, effects
of inderdaad on online discourse understanding (if any) are expected to
be smaller than effects of eigenlijk.
By combining offline and online measures, we investigated effects of
interpersonal DPs on discourse interpretations (the selected discourse
referent) as well as online discourse processing (i.e., during listening).
This allowed us to assess DP effects on distinct stages of the interpretation process, which have not yet been theoretically specified.
Similarly, Kurumada, Brown, Bibyk, Pontillo and Tanenhaus (2014)
investigated effects of contrastive prosody on reference resolution (it
looks/LOOKs like a zebra). They found that contrastive pitch elicited
early eye-movements to non-prototypical referents (e.g., a zebra-like
animal), suggesting that listeners immediately used the prosodic cue
and the visual context to generate predictions about the upcoming referent. Despite this immediate effect on visual attention, mouse clicks in
the contrastive pitch condition were delayed compared to the noncontrastive pitch condition. Following Grodner et al. (2010), Kurumada
et al. (2014) propose that the delayed responses do not reflect the costs
of generating a pragmatic inference, but the additional work associated
with integrating a more complex discourse interpretation on the basis of

hand, and interpersonal DPs on the other. Whether marking a disruption of one's own talk (disfluencies, repairs) or expressing understanding of (generic backchannels) or stance toward (specific backchannels) the other's talk, all these elements encode some subjective
perspective on the dialogue. By contrast, interpersonal DPs express an
intersubjective perspective: they encode a relation between speaker beliefs and (assumed) addressee beliefs about the discourse, hence reflecting acknowledgment of mutual belief.
It has been argued by some researchers that language processing is
initially egocentric, possibly to minimize processing costs associated
with constructing representations of mutual belief (e.g., Horton &
Keysar, 1996; Keysar, Barr, Balin, & Brauner, 2000; Keysar, Barr, &
Horton, 1998). By contrast, others have demonstrated immediate effects of perspective-taking on language processing in interactive conversation (e.g., Brown-Schmidt & Tanenhaus, 2008; Hanna &
Tanenhaus, 2004; Hanna, Tanenhaus, & Trueswell, 2003; for reviews,
see Brown-Schmidt & Hanna, 2011; Brown-Schmidt & Heller, 2018).
For instance, Brown-Schmidt, Gunlogson, & Tanenhaus (2008) showed
in a visual world eye tracking experiment that addressees take the
speaker's perspective on the visual context into account (for instance, a
grid in which some objects were visible to both speech partners and
others are only visible to one interlocutor), and to immediately use this
information about common and privileged ground to infer which object
the speaker was referring to. Here, we investigate whether listeners are
equally sensitive to linguistic common ground-managing cues, i.e., inderdaad and eigenlijk.
The present study
We carried out two visual world eye-tracking experiments (e.g.,
Tanenhaus, Spivey-Knowlton, Eberhard, & Sedivy, 1995), in which
participants were engaged in an online dialogue completion task. They
first read an introductory context sentence that served to build up a
discourse model (`setting the scene'), and then listened to a short dialogue consisting of a question (or other sequence-initiating action) and
a response. Simultaneously, they looked at a visual display with images
of four potential discourse referents. The spoken responses in the dialogues either contained one of the two expectation-managing DPs (inderdaad and eigenlijk) or one of several control adverbs (see Appendix A
for examples). Moreover, one word describing a critical discourse referent was left out of the response (replaced by a beep). The task for the
participants was to choose the most likely dialogue continuation by
clicking on the referent that they thought best fit the position of the
beep in the response. We analyzed their click behavior as well as looks
to potential dialogue continuations over the time course of the response.
Previous VWP research has convincingly shown that the context
strongly constrains potential sentence interpretations online, as measured by a higher probability of fixating contextually likely referents
relative to less likely referents (e.g., Tanenhaus et al., 1995) even before
the critical referent is mentioned in the speech stream (e.g., Altmann &
Kamide, 1999; van Bergen & Flecken, 2017; Kamide, Altmann, &
Haywood, 2003; Knoeferle, Crocker, Scheepers, & Pickering, 2005). We
aimed to replicate this finding by comparing looks to potential dialogue
continuations in strongly constraining dialogues with less constraining
dialogues (as measured by offline cloze probabilities) over the time
course of the response. More importantly, we built on this finding by
examining to what extent expectation-managing DPs modulate the effect of discourse constraint, by comparing looks to contextually likely
vs. less likely dialogue continuations in strongly constraining dialogues
upon encountering a DP.
We opted for an adapted version of the original visual world paradigm (i.e., clicking on a non-mentioned referent) to do justice to the
typical polyfunctionality of expectation-managing DPs. As discussed
above, inderdaad and eigenlijk can apply to various levels of information
expressed in their host utterance: they can mark a relation with an
193

Journal of Memory and Language 103 (2018) 191-209

G. van Bergen, H.R. Bosker

this pragmatic inference with relevant information in the context. In the
present study we address this claim: whereas inderdaad confirms an
already established discourse model, eigenlijk requires a revision of an
established discourse model. We therefore hypothesize that both expectation-managing DPs immediately modulate visual attention, but
that the integration of a revised discourse model with the information
in the visual context may incur additional processing costs. This could
be reflected in delayed discourse completions after encountering eigenlijk compared to encountering inderdaad.

Table 2
Cloze probabilities of Target responses in each condition.
Condition

Lemma

High-Adverb
High-Inderdaad
High-Eigenlijk
Medium-Adverb

Experiment 1
Method

Materials and design
Linguistic stimuli. Experimental materials comprised 48 short
conversations, consisting of a written context sentence followed by a
spoken dialogue. Conversations occurred in 4 conditions. The level of
discourse constraint was manipulated such that the discourse (the
context sentence in combination with the question) either evoked a
specific referential expectation (High) or not (Medium). In highconstraining conversations, the beep in the responses followed either
an adverb or adverbial phrase (High-Adverb, e.g., heel erg `very much',
gisteren `yesterday') or a discourse particle (High-Inderdaad vs. HighEigenlijk); in medium-constraining contexts, responses were identical to
the responses in the High-Adverb condition (Medium-Adverb). An
example of an experimental conversation in all conditions is given in
Table 1; a subset of 10 stimuli can be found in the Appendix A.
Discourse constraint was determined on the basis of a web-based
cloze test, in which participants read each of the 48 experimental
conversations in one condition, and were asked to fill in the missing
word in the response (12 items per condition, distributed over 4 lists; 20
participants per list). Lemmas with the highest cloze probability in the
High-Adverb condition (leeuw `lion' in the above example) were selected
as Target responses; cloze probabilities for these Target responses were
then calculated for each condition (Table 2). We also calculated cloze
probabilities at the discourse level, whereby all responses that
Table 1
Example of an experimental stimulus.
Conversation

High

Context
Ondanks haar angst voor dieren is Marie naar het circus geweest.
Despite her fear of animals, Mary went to the circus.
Question
"Je vond de dierenact zeker doodeng?"
You must have been terrified by the animal act?
Response
"Ik schrok heel erg/inderdaad/eigenlijk van de rondrennende *BEEP*
aan het eind."
I was very/indeed/actually scared by the running *BEEP* at the
end.

Medium

Context
Op zaterdagmiddag is Marie naar het circus geweest.
On Saturday afternoon, Mary went to the circus.
Question
"Wat is je het best bijgebleven?"
What did you find most memorable?
Response
"Ik schrok heel erg van de rondrennende *BEEP* aan het eind."
I was very scared by the running *BEEP* at the end.

Discourse

M

(SD)

M

(SD)

0.74
0.78
0.52
0.23

(0.22)
(0.19)
(0.23)
(0.23)

0.87
0.93
0.62
0.28

(0.15)
(0.10)
(0.24)
(0.28)

semantically fit the discourse constraint (e.g., olifant `elephant', tijger
`tiger' in the example above) were counted as Target responses (two
independent coders, inter-annotator agreement 97%; disagreements
were resolved through discussion; cf. Table 2).
Analyses of participants' responses on the cloze test were performed
by a logistic mixed-effects regression analysis using the lme4 (Bates,
Maechler, Bolker, & Walker, 2015) and lmerTest (Kuznetsova,
Brockhoff, & Christensen, 2017) packages in R (R core team, 2015). The
final model predicted the probability of a Target response on the basis
of Condition (4 levels, High-Adverb as reference category), and included
the maximal random effects structure justified by the design (Barr,
Levy, Scheepers, & Tily, 2013). Results revealed that, compared to HighAdverb conversations, Target cloze probabilities were significantly
lower in High-Eigenlijk conversations (Lemma:  = -1.41, SE = 0.22,
p < 0.001; Discourse:  = -2.14, SE = 0.28, p < 0.001) and
Medium-Adverb conversations (Lemma:  = -3.41, SE = 0.33,
p < 0.001; Discourse:  = -3.94, SE = 0.41, p < 0.001). Target
cloze probability was significantly higher in High-Inderdaad conversations than in High-Adverb conversations at the Discourse level
( = 0.77, SE = 0.37, p = 0.04); the difference did not reach significance at the Lemma level ( = 0.18, SE = 0.18, p = 0.3). These
results suggest that both inderdaad and eigenlijk influenced the likelihood that the dialogue would continue with the target word (e.g.,
leeuw `lion'), compared to the same dialogue without a DP (but with an
adverb). Note, however, that Target cloze probabilities were still relatively high in the High-Eigenlijk condition, suggesting that eigenlijk was
not always interpreted as marking a referential contrast. These results
underline the highly context-dependent nature of conventional implicatures: the inferred expectation that eigenlijk contrasts with can be
based on any aspect of the surrounding discourse situation.
Spoken dialogues were recorded by four Dutch native speakers (two
male, two female), in all possible questioner-answerer combinations.
Because the DPs typically appear in casual conversation, and not in
formal or read speech, care was taken to mimic natural dialogue as
closely as possible. To this end, conversational pairs sat in a recording
booth together while their interactions were being recorded. They were
instructed not to read the utterances from paper, but to speak informally and to imagine having a real conversation. Responses were
recorded as complete utterances (i.e., including the target word) to
keep the sentence intonation pattern as natural as possible; to avoid coarticulation, speakers were told to pause before pronouncing the critical
word. Each question-answer pair was recorded three times, the most
natural ones of which were selected as experimental materials. All
sound files were normalized in intensity; critical words in the responses
were replaced by a 440 Hz sine waveform with a length of 500 ms using
version 2.1.1 of Audacity(R).

Participants
Forty native Dutch speakers (31 female, age M = 22.4 years, range
18-33) participated in the first experiment. All were students at
Radboud University in Nijmegen, had normal or corrected-to-normal
vision and normal auditory acuity. All were paid for participation.

Constraint

Target

Visual stimuli. 48 visual displays were constructed, each containing four
images that appeared randomly in one of the four corners of a 22-in.
computer screen. Each display contained one referent that was highly
expected on the basis of the discourse (Expected), one referent that was
contextually unexpected but related to the discourse (Unexpected) and
two referents that were unrelated to the discourse (Distracters).
194

Journal of Memory and Language 103 (2018) 191-209

G. van Bergen, H.R. Bosker

Filler items. In addition to the experimental items, 48 filler dialogues
were created, following the same structure as the experimental
dialogues. Filler discourses varied from low- to high-constraining;
responses never contained a DP. The filler items were combined with
the same displays as the experimental conversations, in which any
picture could serve as Expected, Unexpected or Distracter referent.

Expected referents depicted the lemma with the highest cloze
probability in the High-Adverb condition (leeuw `lion' in the above
example). Unexpected referents were chosen from the discourse
completions that were incongruent with the contextually most likely
dialogue continuation in the High-Adverb Condition. Note that there
was considerable variation in Unexpected dialogue completions: for
instance, if the contextually most likely referent was a specific type of
food (e.g., hamburger), any other type of food would qualify as an
unexpected referent (e.g., pizza, pasta, sushi, ice cream, ...). Moreover,
depictability was an important selection criterion, as well as the
additional constraint that each referent could occur only once in the
experiment. Finally, `Unexpected' referents should be roughly equally
predictable as `Expected' referents in medium-constraining dialogues.
Because of these constraints, Unexpected referents were not always
the lemma with the highest cloze probability in the High-Eigenlijk condition. Still, relative to the High-Adverb condition (Lemma: M = 0.03,
SD = 0.16; Discourse: M = 0.09, SD = 0.13), Unexpected referents had
a higher cloze probability in the High-Eigenlijk condition (Lemma:
M = 0.10, SD = 0.15,  = 1.65, SE = 0.25, p < 0.001; Discourse:
M = 0.35, SD = 0.24,  = 2.05, SE = 0.15, p < 0.001), and a lower
cloze probability in the High-Inderdaad condition (Lemma: M = 0.004,
SD = 0.03,  = -1.99, SE = 0.55, p < 0.001; Discourse: M = 0.03,
SD = 0.05,  = -1.28, SE = 0.23, p < 0.001. In the Medium-Adverb
condition, Lemma cloze probabilities did not significantly differ between Unexpected (M = 0.18, SD = 0.20) and Expected referents,
 = 0.24, SE = 0.37, p = 0.53 (Discourse cloze values were not calculated for unexpected referents, as there was no clear discourse constraint to contrast these referents with). Distracter referents had a cloze
probability of zero in every condition. An example of a display is given
in Fig. 1.
Photographs were either self-taken or acquired from the Bank of
Standardized stimuli (BOSS; Brodeur, Dionne-Dosti, Montreuil, &
Lepage, 2010), the photo-stock website Dreamstime.com, or through
the Google Image search engine. Photos were edited to reduce visual
complexity (e.g., backgrounds removed where possible), converted to
grayscale and resized to a square format of 250 x 250 pixels.

Design. Experimental items were counterbalanced across four lists
following a Latin square design, such that each participant
encountered each experimental conversation in only one condition
(12 items per condition). The 48 filler items were added to each list,
yielding a total of 96 items per list. Trial order was pseudo-randomized,
such that each display occurred once in the first half of the experiment
and once in the second half. Half of the participants first encountered
the display combined with the experimental conversation; the other
half first saw the display in combination with the filler conversation.
Procedure
Participants were tested at the Max Planck Institute for
Psycholinguistics in Nijmegen. All gave written consent to participate in
the experiment. The study was ethically approved by the Faculty of
Social Sciences at Radboud University Nijmegen (Ethics Approval
#ECG2013-1308-120).
To ensure that participants would correctly identify the photographs
used in the experiment, they first performed a picture familiarization
task in which all photos were presented one-by-one, accompanied by a
written one-word description. This task was self-paced, and took on
average 5 min.
Eye movements of the dominant eye were recorded using a towermounted eye-tracker with a 1000 Hz sampling rate (Eyelink 1000; SR
Research). Participants sat about 100 cm from the monitor with their
heads in a chin rest; a 9-point calibration was conducted for each
participant at the beginning of the experiment. Auditory stimuli were
played via headphones, which participants were instructed to wear
throughout.
Each trial began with a fixation cross that remained on the screen
for 500 ms, after which the written context sentence was presented.
Once they had read the context, participants pressed a button; 500 ms
later the question was played. 300 ms after question offset the display
appeared on the screen; after a preview of 1500 ms, the response was
played; simultaneously, a cursor appeared in the center of the display.
Participants were instructed to click on the picture in the display that
they thought best fit at the position of the beep in the response. They
could only click on a picture after the response had been fully played.
After one of the pictures was clicked, the display disappeared and the
next trial started.
The experiment consisted of four practice trials, followed by four
blocks of 24 experimental trials; participants took self-timed breaks in
between. Each experimental session took approximately 45 min in total.

Results
We first assessed whether and how comprehenders' understanding
of the conversation was affected by the discourse constraint and the
discourse particles by analyzing dialogue completion responses (selected referents). Trials in which a Distracter referent was selected were
excluded from further analyses (0.3% of the data; analyses on the full
data set yielded similar results); excessive RTs (  2.5 SD) were also
removed (2.8% data loss). One experimental item had to be excluded
because the question-answer pair was accidentally combined with the
wrong (i.e., medium-constraining) context sentence in the HighInderdaad condition, resulting in 1% data loss. Data analyses were
performed by means of (generalized) linear mixed effects regression
models using the lme4 and lmerTest package in R (R core team, 2015).

Fig. 1. Example of a display. NB: Labels (for illustration purposes only) refer to
the expectation evoked by the discourse, not by the DP in the response.
195

Journal of Memory and Language 103 (2018) 191-209

G. van Bergen, H.R. Bosker

Fig. 2. Proportion of Expected vs. Unexpected referent choices (left panel) and response latencies (right panel) in each condition. Error bars represent  SE.

p < 0.001), indicating that the effect of Selected Referent differed between conditions. Follow-up analyses revealed no significant differences between conditions for Unexpected discourse completions (all
p's > 0.25); for Expected discourse completions, reaction times were
shorter in the High-Inderdaad condition compared to the High-Adverb
condition ( = -0.26, SE = 0.07, p < 0.001). There was no evidence
for a latency difference between the High-Eigenlijk condition and the
High-Adverb condition ( = 0.12, SE = 0.08, p = 0.15), but expected
discourse completions were slower after encountering eigenlijk than
after encountering inderdaad ( = 0.38, SE = 0.09, p < 0.001).

Behavioral results
Fig. 2 shows the proportion of Expected (as opposed to Unexpected)
referent clicks in each condition (left panel) and the mean RTs from
Response Offset per condition split up by selected referent (right panel).
Jittered dots represent mean proportions/RTs per participant.
The left panel suggests an effect of contextual constraint on the
referential choice: the preference to select the Expected referent is increased in the High-Adverb condition compared to the Medium-Adverb
condition (where there is no contextual expectation). This preference is
even stronger in High-Inderdaad contexts, whereas in the High-Eigenlijk
condition there is an increased preference to click on the Unexpected
referent. Results from a logistic mixed-effects analysis1 including Condition (4 levels, reference category High-Adverb) as fixed predictor
confirm that all condition levels significantly differ from the High-Adverb condition: the probability of Expected referent clicks is significantly higher in the High-Inderdaad condition ( = 1.94, SE = 0.40,
p < 0.001), and significantly lower in the High-Eigenlijk condition
( = -3.09, SE = 0.22, p < 0.001) as well as the Medium-Adverb
condition ( = -2.47, SE = 0.21, p < 0.001).
The right panel suggests an effect of contextual constraint on response latencies as well: for high-constraining contexts, unexpected
dialogue completions take more time than expected dialogue completions, whereas there seems to be no latency difference in mediumconstraining contexts. Note that the number of unexpected discourse
completions is very small in the High-Adverb and High-Inderdaad condition, because dialogues in these conditions were almost always
completed with the expected referent. When comparing expected discourse completion latencies between the three high-constraining conditions, responses seem slowest in the High-Eigenlijk condition, suggesting that encountering eigenlijk delays the referential choice. Linear
mixed-effects analyses predicting (log-transformed) reaction times on
the basis of Condition, Selected Referent (Expected vs. Unexpected) and
their interaction revealed a main effect of Selected Referent ( = -0.40,
SE = 0.09, p < 0.001), indicating that participants were generally
faster to complete dialogues with Expected referents that with
Unexpected referents. The interaction effect was also significant
(comparing models with vs. without interaction effect: X2(3) = 12.93,

Interim summary
Findings from the discourse completion task confirm that expectation-managing DPs affect listeners' beliefs about dialogue continuations. Encountering inderdaad, confirming an inferred expectation, led
to more Expected dialogue completions; encountering eigenlijk, marking
a contrast with an inferred expectation, resulted in more Unexpected
dialogue completions.
Our stimuli were designed as to make a referentially contrastive
interpretation of eigenlijk most prominent (i.e., a contrastive referent
was consistently present in the visual context; higher cloze probability
for Unexpected referents in High-Eigenlijk stimuli), but eigenlijk was only
interpreted as marking a referential contrast in around half of the cases.
This means that, despite its strong constraint on possible interpretations, the visual context did not impose a referential interpretation of
eigenlijk on the listener.
Moreover, note that we found considerable variation between participants in the discourse completion responses in the High-Eigenlijk
condition. Some participants were strongly biased to interpret eigenlijk
referentially, almost exclusively choosing Unexpected discourse completions, whereas others hardly ever selected the Unexpected referent.
At the same time, there was considerable item variation, some stimuli
eliciting many more Expected dialogue completions than others. For
instance, an experimental dialogue that almost exclusively elicited
Expected clicks in the High-Eigenlijk condition is given in (2):
(2) Context
Vlak voor zijn sollicitatiegesprek heeft Maarten een broodje met
pesto gegeten.
Right before his job interview, Maarten ate a sandwich with
pesto.
Question

1
The model including the maximal random effects structure failed to converge; reported estimates are based on the final model including random intercepts for participants and items.

196

Journal of Memory and Language 103 (2018) 191-209

G. van Bergen, H.R. Bosker

Click-contingent gaze patterns
Fixations to the four areas of interest (AoIs), i.e., the four referents
in the display, were calculated for the duration of the Response, using
the Eyelink Data Viewer software (version 2.1.1, SR Research). We
analyzed fixations in relation to listeners' click behavior. Analyzing
click-contingent gaze patterns allows for an assessment of how listeners
arrived at their final interpretation, and to what extent DPs influenced
this interpretation process.
Fig. 3 shows the proportion of click-contingent AoI fixations from
Response onset until Response offset per condition; grey-shaded areas
indicate  SEs. Solid lines represent the proportion of looks to the
eventually clicked referent; dashed lines show the proportion of looks
to the competitor. Dotted lines represent the average proportion of
looks to the two Distracters. Note that the selected referent in the HighInderdaad condition was almost exclusively the Expected referent (e.g.,
lion). By contrast, in the High-Eigenlijk condition, the selected referent
was sometimes the Expected and sometimes the Unexpected referent
(e.g., clown).
We analyzed two subsequent time windows within the Response
time window:

Heb ik nog iets tussen mijn tanden?
Is there something between my teeth?
Response
Ik zie eigenlijk daar rechts iets in je (mond /haar) zitten.
I see [actually] something there on the right in your (mouth/
hair).
In this case, eigenlijk is likely interpreted as signaling a socio-pragmatic
contrast; that is, a contrast between the speech act (an affirmative response) and an implied expectation for a socially preferred no-response.
In principle, the same variability holds for the interpretation of inderdaad, i.e., relating to some discourse aspect but not necessarily a
referential aspect. Unlike eigenlijk, however, inderdaad does not mark a
contrastive relation. Rather, it reduces the probability of a contrast with
any discourse aspect, including a referential contrast. The choice for an
Unexpected dialogue completion in the High-Inderdaad condition would
therefore be highly unlikely.
Whereas inderdaad was found to speed up Expected discourse
completions relative to adverbs, we found no evidence for a speed-up
effect of eigenlijk if listeners committed to a referential interpretation. In
fact, Unexpected dialogue completions were slower than Expected
completions even after encountering eigenlijk. This could mean that
participants entertained the two referentially contrastive interpretations all along and made up their mind only shortly before selecting a
picture. Moreover, we found no evidence that response latencies differed between eigenlijk and adverbs, leaving open the possibility that
participants ignored eigenlijk in these cases. In order to investigate
whether and how listeners integrated the expectation-managing information encoded in DPs during the online interpretation process, we
examined listener's gaze behavior as the conversation unfolded.

- An EARLY INTEGRATION time window, ranging from 200 ms after
DP (or adverb) onset until 200 ms after the onset of the beep (mean
duration 1191 ms). In this time window we assessed immediate effects of contextual constraint and DPs on visual attention. If listeners
immediately integrate the expectation-managing information encoded in the DPs, fixations to the two discourse-related referents are
predicted to diverge between conditions in this time window, such
that eventually selected referents are fixated more after

Fig. 3. Click-contingent gaze patterns over time for the duration of the Response.

197

Journal of Memory and Language 103 (2018) 191-209

G. van Bergen, H.R. Bosker

Fig. 4. Proportions of looks to the clicked referent (dark grey bars) and the competitor (light grey bars) per condition during the Early (left panel) and Late
Integration window (right panel).

attention in high-constraining contexts by analyzing the probability of
Clicked Referent over Competitor fixations on the basis of Condition (3
levels) in the two time windows. Results show that the difference between Inderdaad and Eigenlijk was significant in both time windows
(Early:  = 1.48, SE = 0.47, p < 0.01; Late:  = 3.00, SE = 0.67,
p < 0.001), indicating that the preference to fixate the to-be-clicked
referent is stronger after encountering inderdaad than after encountering eigenlijk. We found no evidence for a difference between
either of the DP conditions and the High-Adverb condition in the Early
Integration window (Inderdaad:  = 0.77, SE = 0.42, p = 0.07;
Eigenlijk:  = -0.48, SE = 0.48, p = 0.15); in the Late Integration
window, the differences did reach significance (Inderdaad:  = 1.04
SE = 0.49, p < 0.05; Eigenlijk:  = -1.96, SE = 0.65, p < 0.01),
suggesting that both DPs affect visual attention to potential discourse
continuations.
Recall that for conversations in the High-Eigenlijk condition, the
choice between Expected and Unexpected referents was more or less
equally distributed; arguably, both could be likely dialogue completions
in this condition, depending on the inferred expectation that eigenlijk
was interpreted to mark a contrast with. In the High-Adverb and the
High-Inderdaad condition, however, participants predominantly selected the referent that was most likely given the context (Expected
referent), leaving us with too few data points to analyze Unexpected
click-contingent gaze behavior in these conditions.
In order to assess to what extent gaze patterns are dependent on the
referent choice, we investigated gaze patterns for Expected and
Unexpected referent clicks separately for the High-Eigenlijk condition
(Fig. 5). Note that the solid lines in the two panels now refer to different
referents, i.e., the Expected referent in the left panel and the Unexpected referent in the right panel.
There seems to be an initial preference to fixate the Expected referent (solid line in left panel; dashed line in right panel), irrespective of
the eventual referent choice, in the first 500 ms after Response onset,
suggesting an effect of contextual constraint on visual attention. If the
Unexpected referent is eventually clicked (right panel), attention to the
Unexpected referent starts increasing very quickly after encountering
eigenlijk. This suggests that the initial contextual expectation is revised
immediately upon encountering the DP. This is corroborated by an
analysis predicting the probability of fixating the Selected referent over
the Competitor on the basis of Referent Choice (Expected vs.
Unexpected, centered), showing an early preference to fixate the to-beclicked referent over the competitor ( = 1.57, SE = 0.32, p < 0.001);
this preference does not differ between Expected and Unexpected

encountering inderdaad and less after encountering eigenlijk.
- A LATE INTEGRATION time window, ranging from 200 ms after
beep onset until Response offset (mean duration 1104 ms); i.e., just
before listeners select the referent best fitting the Response. AoI
fixations during this part of the Response are analyzed to assess later
and/or sustained effects of discourse constraint and DPs on listeners'
final discourse interpretation. If integration of the DPs requires additional processing, fixations to the two discourse-related referents
are predicted to start diverging between conditions in this time
window.
For statistical analysis, we calculated the (log-transformed) odds of
fixating the Selected referent over the Competitor by subtracting the
odds of fixating the Competitor referent from the odds of fixating the
Selected referent (cf. Rommers, Meyer, Praamstra, & Huettig, 2013) in
each time window. Linear mixed effects regression analyses were performed to predict the probability of fixating the eventually Selected
referent over the Competitor on the basis of Condition. Unless indicated
otherwise, final models included the maximal random effects structure
justified by the design (cf. Barr et al., 2013).
Fig. 4 shows fixation proportions of Selected Referents and Competitors in each condition for the two time windows. The figure suggests
a general preference to fixate the eventually selected referent; this
preference seems to differ between conditions, suggesting an effect of
both contextual constraint and expectation-managing DPs on the interpretation process. The differences between conditions seem to exist
in both time windows, but appear to be more pronounced in the Late
Integration window.
We first analyzed the effect of contextual constraint by means of a
linear mixed-effects regression model predicting the probability of
Clicked Referent fixations over Competitor fixations on the basis of
Constraint (2 levels; Medium-Adverb (intercept) vs. High-Adverb) in the
two time windows. In the Early Integration window, results showed a
preference to fixate the to-be-clicked referent over the competitor in the
Medium-Adverb condition ( = 1.15, SE = 0.34, p < 0.01); this preference was stronger in the High-Adverb condition ( = 1.21, SE = 0.49,
p < 0.05). In the Late Integration window, the difference between
medium and high-constraining contexts was also significant ( = 2.87,
SE = 0.56, p < 0.001). These results suggest that the prior context
constrains visual attention: attentional preference to the eventually
selected referent is increased if the context evokes a specific referential
expectation.
Next, we analyzed effects of expectation-managing DPs on visual
198

Journal of Memory and Language 103 (2018) 191-209

G. van Bergen, H.R. Bosker

Fig. 5. Click-contingent gaze patterns over time for Expected (left) and Unexpected (right) referent clicks in the High-Eigenlijk condition. NB: solid lines refer to
Expected referents in the left panel, and to Unexpected referentis in the right panel.

reduces and eigenlijk increases competition from alternative dialogue
continuations when compared with an adverb. We found no evidence
for an immediate effect of inderdaad on visual attention when compared
with adverbs; by contrast, eigenlijk immediately increased attention to
competing discourse referents relative to adverbs, but only if comprehenders committed to a referentially contrastive dialogue continuation.

referents ( = 0.56, SE = 0.70, p = 0.43), indicating that the initial
attentional preference is immediately revised when eigenlijk is interpreted referentially. Moreover, both panels in Fig. 5 suggest sustained
attention to the semantic competitor throughout the Response time
window (when compared with the High-Adverb and High-Inderdaad
condition, cf. Fig. 3). This suggests that competition from alternative
dialogue continuations is stronger after encountering eigenlijk than after
hearing inderdaad or an adverb, regardless of its interpretation.
Restricting our analysis of the three high-constraining conditions to
trials in which the Expected referent was chosen, results show that the
preference to fixate the Expected referent is stronger after inderdaad
than after eigenlijk in both time windows (Early:  = 1.32, SE = 0.56,
p < 0.05; Late:  = 3.01, SE = 0.64, p < 0.001). We found no evidence for a difference between either DP condition and the Adverb
condition in the Early Integration window (Inderdaad:  = 0.63,
SE = 0.40, p = 0.12; Eigenlijk:  = -0.70, SE = 0.55, p = 0.21); we
can hence not determine whether the early difference between the DPs
is due to increased competition from alternative referents after encountering eigenlijk, or reduced competition from alternative referents
after hearing inderdaad. In the Late Integration window, however, both
DPs significantly differ from adverbs (Inderdaad:  = 0.96, SE = 0.47,
p < 0.05; Eigenlijk:  = -2.05, SE = 0.67, p < 0.01), confirming that
both inderdaad and eigenlijk modulate attentional preferences for the
Expected referents when compared with adverbs.
To assess effects of referentially contrastive interpretations of eigenlijk on gaze behavior, we compared Unexpected click-contingent
gaze patterns in the High-Eigenlijk condition with Expected click-contingent gaze patterns in the High-Inderdaad and High-Adverb condition.
Analyses of both time windows reveal that the preference to fixate the
to-be-clicked Unexpected referent after encountering eigenlijk is weaker
than to fixate the to-be-clicked Expected referent after encountering
inderdaad (Early:  = 1.79, SE = 0.49, p < 0.001;2 Late:  = 3.05,
SE = 0.85, p < 0.001) or an adverb (Early:  = -1.15, SE = 0.58,
p = 0.05); Late:  = -1.99, SE = 0.72, p < 0.01). This suggests that if
listeners commit to a referential interpretation of eigenlijk, they still
experience increased competition from alternative dialogue continuations when compared with an adverb or inderdaad.
In sum, findings from the click-congruent gaze patterns provide
evidence that both eigenlijk and inderdaad affect visual attention to
potential dialogue continuations during listening, such that inderdaad

Discussion
Combining the gaze patterns with the behavioral results, findings
confirm our hypothesis that inderdaad reduces competition from alternative interpretations during listening (although not immediately in the
Early Integration window), suggesting that the inferred expectation
confirmed by inderdaad was readily available to strengthen listeners'
beliefs about possible dialogue continuations, which speeded up
Expected dialogue completions relative to adverbs.
Although we found no evidence for effects of eigenlijk relative to
adverbs on dialogue completion latencies, the gaze patterns confirm
that listeners do integrate the contrastive information encoded in eigenlijk to guide their visual attention. If participants chose for an
Expected dialogue completion after encountering eigenlijk, we found
increased competition from alternative interpretations relative to adverbs, arguing against participants ignoring eigenlijk in these cases. In
addition, gaze patterns revealed that participants immediately committed to referentially contrastive interpretations of eigenlijk, excluding
the possibility that participants entertained the two possible interpretations all along. This did however not result in faster discourse
completions: rather, referential interpretations of eigenlijk slowed down
discourse completions when compared with non-referential interpretations. With this finding we corroborate earlier claims that pragmatic inferences can be generated immediately, whereas the integration of a revised discourse model with information in the visual context
incurs additional processing costs (e.g., Grodner et al., 2010; Kurumada
et al., 2014).
The considerable item variation in dialogue completions suggests
that, despite the prominence of a referential constraint, specific interpretations of eigenlijk are determined by the specific characteristics of
each individual dialogue, providing empirical evidence for their assumed polyfunctionality and the context-dependent nature of conventional implicatures. Moreover, the large inter-subject variation implies
that interpretations of eigenlijk are not only situation-specific, but also
listener-specific: some participants were much more likely to select
Unexpected discourse continuations than others (and vice versa). This

2
The Early Integration model included random intercepts for participants
and items, as well as random by-item slopes for Condition.

199

Journal of Memory and Language 103 (2018) 191-209

G. van Bergen, H.R. Bosker

This measure has been employed previously in online language tasks to
assess individuals' pragmatic language processing. Scores on this scale
have for instance been found to modulate the N400 component in ERP
studies (Kulakova & Nieuwland, 2016; Nieuwland et al., 2010). The two
selected subscales assess social skill and communication, two areas
relevant to pragmatic competence. This will allow us to correlate participants' individual pragmatic competence with effects of interpersonal
DPs on discourse understanding. Participants with reduced pragmatic
skills may overall be less sensitive to interpersonal DPs during language
comprehension, in the sense that they are less likely to make pragmatic
inferences about the questioner's expectation that eigenlijk contrasts
with when listening to the dialogue. This could lead to a smaller proportion of Unexpected discourse continuations, and smaller effects of
eigenlijk on visual attention and response latencies. Pragmatic inferencing could also be cognitively more costly for participants with reduced
pragmatic abilities, which could be reflected in delayed effects of eigenlijk on visual attention. Alternatively, participants with reduced
pragmatic competence may be less sensitive to specifically socio-pragmatic (face-saving) uses of eigenlijk. This could be reflected in a higher
preference for referential interpretations of eigenlijk, as well as more
pronounced effects of eigenlijk on visual attention and response latencies (i.e., increased attention to alternative discourse referents and
delayed response latencies).

raises the question where such individual interpretational biases come
from. One possibility is that listener-specific interpretation biases may
relate to the individual frequency distribution of referential and nonreferential uses of eigenlijk encountered in everyday conversational interaction. For instance, if an individual has encountered mainly sociopragmatic (i.e., face-saving) uses of eigenlijk, this specific distribution
may affect her preferred interpretation of eigenlijk in any context. In
fact, our experimental design may have also induced an interpretational
bias: although dialogue interpretations were left open, stimuli were
constructed as to make a referential interpretation most prominent. As a
result, some participants may have more strongly favored a referential
interpretation of eigenlijk.
Another explanation for the inter-subject variation may be that the
interpretation of eigenlijk is related to individuals' pragmatic competence. Recall that using interpersonal DPs entails perspective-taking:
the speaker has to make an inference about her addressee's expectations
of the discourse situation. Similarly, when listening to the experimental
dialogues, participants need to infer the questioner's expectation that
eigenlijk in the response contrasts with. Previous research has demonstrated that online pragmatic language comprehension is modulated by
individuals' pragmatic abilities (e.g., counterfactuals, Kulakova &
Nieuwland, 2016; scalar implicatures, Nieuwland, Ditman &
Kuperberg, 2010). If some participants in our sample were more
pragmatically competent than others, this may have induced variation
in interpretations of eigenlijk.
Experiment 2 was designed to further investigate the listener-specific variation in interpretations of eigenlijk. We examined (1) the potential role of the frequency distribution of uses of eigenlijk in the local
experimental environment and (2) the contribution of individual participants' pragmatic competence to their interpretation of eigenlijk. To
address the first question, we increased the frequency of non-referential
uses of eigenlijk throughout the experiment, thus allowing us to investigate to what extent a change in the frequency distribution of uses
of eigenlijk in the experimental environment affects participants' interpretations of eigenlijk in high-constraining conversations.
Two hypotheses were formulated. Under the assumption that listeners adapt to the statistics of the experimental environment during
language comprehension (e.g., Delaney-Busch, Morgan, Lau, &
Kuperberg, 2018; Fine, Jaeger, Farmer, & Qian, 2013, but see
Harrington Stack, James, & Watson, 2018; Kaschak & Glenberg, 2004;
Norris, McQueen, & Cutler, 2003), we may expect an increased number
of non-referential interpretations in the High-Eigenlijk condition (i.e.,
more Expected discourse continuations) in Experiment 2 compared to
Experiment 1. During listening, we would expect the effect of eigenlijk
on visual attention to be immediate, but potentially less pronounced:
the increased frequency of non-referential uses of eigenlijk may reduce
semantic competition from alternative discourse referents, as reflected
in decreased attention to Unexpected referents and faster discourse
continuations compared to Experiment 1. Alternatively, encountering
more contrastive cues in the speech stream altogether (i.e., higher
frequency of eigenlijk throughout an experimental session) could increase the salience of the referential contrast present in the visual
context. This may yield a higher proportion of referential interpretations of eigenlijk; i.e., more Unexpected discourse continuations compared to Experiment 1. If this is the case, we expect the effect of eigenlijk
on visual attention to again be immediate, but potentially more pronounced: we may find increased attention to semantic competitors
during listening and delayed discourse continuations compared to Experiment 1.
To assess whether the interpretation of interpersonal DPs is related
to individuals' pragmatic competence, participants in Experiment 2
were asked to complete two subscales of the Autism-Spectrum Quotient
(AQ) questionnaire, a self-assessment screening instrument to assess the
degree to which an individual of normal intelligence shows autistic
traits (Baron-Cohen, Wheelwright, Skinner, & Martin, 2001; Dutch
translation validated by Hoekstra, Bartels, Cath, & Boomsma, 2008).

Experiment 2
In Experiment 2 we increased the frequency of non-referential uses
of eigenlijk by combining medium-constraining contexts with responses
containing eigenlijk (hereafter: the Medium-Eigenlijk condition), as
shown in Table 3.
Recall that for medium-constraining dialogues, both 'Expected'
(lion) and 'Unexpected' (clown) referents are likely discourse continuations. Since the context does not evoke an expectation of one referent over the other, eigenlijk cannot mark a referential contrast in such
contexts. Yet, it can express a contrastive relation with some other inferred expectation: in the above example (which is grammatical and
pragmatically acceptable in Dutch), it could for instance mark the unexpectedness of the response as a whole, i.e., the responder admitting to
be frightened in the circus. Given that there is no specific referential
expectation in medium-constraining contexts, we do not expect the
presence of eigenlijk to affect the referential choice in this condition
compared to the Medium-Adverb condition in Experiment 1. However,
the contrastive meaning of eigenlijk may affect visual attention in this
condition: we may find the attentional preference for the to-be-selected
referent to be delayed compared to the Medium-Adverb condition in
Experiment 1.
Method
Participants
Thirty-two native Dutch speakers (26 female, age M = 22.7 years,
Table 3
Example of an experimental stimulus in the Medium-Eigenlijk condition in
Experiment 2.

200

Constraint

Conversation

Medium

Context
Op zaterdagmiddag is Marie naar het circus geweest.
On Saturday afternoon, Mary went to the circus.
Question
"Wat is je het best bijgebleven?"
What did you find most memorable?
Response
"Ik schrok eigenlijk van de rondrennende *BEEP* aan het eind."
I was actually scared by the running *BEEP* at the end.

Journal of Memory and Language 103 (2018) 191-209

G. van Bergen, H.R. Bosker

SE = 0.51, p < 0.001), and significantly lower in the High-Eigenlijk
condition ( = -3.03, SE = 0.26, p < 0.001) as well as the MediumEigenlijk condition ( = -2.94, SE = 0.26, p < 0.001).
In order to assess whether the presence of eigenlijk in mediumconstraining contexts affected participants' preferred discourse completions, we compared click behavior in medium-constraining contexts
between experiments (Medium-Adverb in Experiment 1 vs. MediumEigenlijk in Experiment 2). Results showed no significant effect of
Experiment ( = -0.31, SE = 0.19, p = 0.11), indicating that completions of medium-constraining dialogues did not change by the presence
of eigenlijk. When comparing click behavior between experiments in the
High-Eigenlijk condition, analysis revealed no significant effect of
Experiment either ( = 0.49, SE = 0.38, p = 0.20), suggesting that the
increased frequency of non-referential eigenlijk in the experimental
environment did not modulate the proportion of referential vs. nonreferential interpretations of eigenlijk in high-constraining contexts.
The response latencies (right panel) show a pattern very similar to
Experiment 1 as well. Unexpected discourse completions again seem
slower than expected discourse completions, with the exception of
medium-constraining contexts (where both referents are equally likely
discourse completions). Linear mixed-effects analyses indeed showed a
significant main effect of Selected Referent ( = -0.21, SE = 0.11,
p < 0.05) and a marginally significant Selected Referent by Condition
interaction effect (comparing models with vs. without interaction effect: 2 (3) = 6.55, p = 0.09). Again, follow-up analyses revealed no
significant differences between conditions for Unexpected discourse
completions (all p's > 0.48); for Expected discourse completions, responses in the High-Eigenlijk condition were longer than in the HighAdverb condition ( = 0.29, SE = 0.09, p < 0.01). Latencies did not
differ between the High-Inderdaad condition and the High-Adverb condition ( = -0.13, SE = 0.07, p = 0.10), but expected discourse completions were faster after encountering inderdaad than after encountering eigenlijk ( = -0.41, SE = 0.09, p < 0.001).
Recall that in Experiment 1, Expected discourse completions were
faster after inderdaad than after an adverb; however, this difference did
not reach significance in Experiment 2. Conversely, Expected discourse
completions after eigenlijk were slower than after an adverb in
Experiment 2, whereas this difference did not reach significance in
Experiment 1. A combined analysis of Expected discourse completion
latencies across Experiments revealed that both DPs significantly differed from the High-Adverb condition (High-Inderdaad:  = -0.20,
SE = 0.06, p < 0.01; High-Eigenlijk:  = 0.21, SE = 0.07, p < 0.01;

range 19-33) participated in Experiment 2. All were students at
Radboud University in Nijmegen, had normal or corrected-to-normal
vision, normal auditory acuity, and were paid for participation.
Materials and design
We used the same linguistic stimuli as in Experiment 1, except that
responses in the Medium-Eigenlijk condition were now identical to the
responses in the High-Eigenlijk condition (but combined with a less
constraining context; see Table 3 above). Visual stimuli and filler items
were identical to those in Experiment 1; the design and procedure were
also identical, except that participants in Experiment 2 completed the
shortened version of the AQ questionnaire directly after the experiment.
This questionnaire comprised 20 propositions addressing social skill
(e.g., I find it difficult to work out people's intentions) and communication
(e.g., Other people frequently tell me that what I've said is impolite, even
though I think it is polite). Participants had to indicate on a 4-point scale
to what extent they agreed with each proposition (1 = completely
agree, 4 = completely disagree). Completing the questionnaire took an
additional 2 min on average.
Results
Data were analyzed using the same analysis procedures as in
Experiment 1. Moreover, to compare the results between experiments,
we performed additional analyses on the combined data from
Experiments 1 and 2 that included the factor Experiment and its interaction with other independent variables as fixed predictors.
AQ scores were calculated following the procedure described in
Baron-Cohen, Wheelwright, Skinner, Martin, and Clucley (2001);
higher AQ scores indicate stronger autistic traits. For each AQ subscale
the maximal score is 10; participants could thus score between 0 and 20
on pragmatic (in)competence.
Behavioral results
Fig. 6 shows the proportion of Expected (vs. Unexpected) referent
choices and completion latencies in each condition for Experiment 2.
Comparing the left panel of Fig. 6 to the left panel in Fig. 2, the
distribution of Expected and Unexpected discourse completions over
conditions seems highly similar between experiments. A logistic mixedeffects analysis shows that all conditions again significantly differ from
the High-Adverb condition: the probability of Expected referent clicks is
significantly higher in the High-Inderdaad condition ( = 2.14,

Fig. 6. Proportion of Expected (vs. Unexpected) referent choices (left panel) and response latencies (right panel) per condition in Experiment 2.
201

Journal of Memory and Language 103 (2018) 191-209

G. van Bergen, H.R. Bosker

Fig. 7. Click-contingent gaze patterns over time (Response onset - Response offset) in each condition (Experiment 2).

Medium-Adverb:  = 0.46, SE = 0.06, p < 0.001). We found no evidence for a main effect of Experiment ( = 0.15, SE = 0.10, p = 0.15),
nor for an Experiment by Condition interaction (comparing models with
vs. without interaction effect: X2(3) = 5.81 p = 0.12), allowing us to
conclude that both expectation-managing DPs affect Expected dialogue
completion latencies in opposite directions when compared with adverbs.
A comparison of reaction times in the High-Eigenlijk condition between experiments revealed a significant main effect of Selected Referent
( = -0.18, SE = 0.08, p < 0.05), indicating that after encountering
eigenlijk, Expected discourse completions were faster than Unexpected
discourse completions. We found no evidence for a main effect of
Experiment ( = 0.03, SE = 0.12, p = 0.74), nor for an interaction effect
( = -0.16, SE = 0.13, p = 0.22), suggesting that the increased frequency of eigenlijk in the experimental context neither speeded up nor
slowed down participants' dialogue completions. Comparing response
latencies in the Medium-Eigenlijk condition (Experiment 2) with the
Medium-Adverb condition (Experiment 1), analyses showed no significant main effects of Selected Referent ( = -0.01, SE = 0.06,
p = 0.85) or Experiment ( = -0.05, SE = 0.10, p = 0.64), nor a significant interaction effect ( = -0.02, SE = 0.11, p = 0.88); this suggests that encountering eigenlijk instead of an adverb did not affect
completion latencies in medium-constraining conversations.
As in Experiment 1, we found considerable variation across participants in the High-Eigenlijk condition. In order to assess whether these
individual interpretation biases of eigenlijk were related to pragmatic
competence, we included the individual AQ scores as predictor in the
regression models. Participants' AQ scores were on average very low
(M = 1.83), indicating high pragmatic competence; the variation

between participants was relatively small (SD = 1.85), with individual
scores ranging from 0 to 8. Given the limited variation, it is not surprising that pragmatic competence did not significantly modulate the
probability of Expected over Unexpected clicks in this condition
( = -0.07, SE = 0.14, p = 0.62). Similarly, response latencies were
not significantly modulated by pragmatic competence ( = -0.01,
SE = 0.04, p = 0.86), neither for Expected nor for Unexpected discourse continuations (comparing models with vs. without Pragmatic
competence by Selected Referent interaction: X2(2) = 0.14, p = 0.71).
The lack of variation in pragmatic competence in our sample keeps us
from drawing any conclusions about these null findings.
In sum, the behavioral results from Experiments 1 and 2 together
confirm our hypothesis that expectation-managing DPs modulate
comprehenders' expectations about the continuation of a dialogue.
Encountering inderdaad led to more and faster Expected dialogue
completions relative to an adverb; encountering eigenlijk yielded variation in dialogue completions. In addition, encountering eigenlijk
slowed down dialogue completions when compared with an adverb.
Unexpected completions were thereby more delayed than Expected
completions, providing additional support for the assumption that integrating information in the visual context with a revised discourse
model incurs additional processing costs.
We found no evidence that the increased frequency of non-referential eigenlijk modulated its preferred interpretation in high-constraining contexts, nor that encountering eigenlijk instead of an adverb
affected the interpretation of medium-constraining dialogues. Because
of the lack of individual variation in pragmatic competence, the question whether individual interpretation biases of interpersonal DPs are
related to pragmatic abilities could not be answered successfully.
202

Journal of Memory and Language 103 (2018) 191-209

G. van Bergen, H.R. Bosker

Fig. 8. Proportions of looks to the selected referent (dark grey bars) and the competitor referent (light grey bars) per condition during the Early (left panel) and Late
Integration window (right panel) (Experiment 2).

between experiments ( = -0.13, SE = 0.57, p = 0.82).3
Next, we analyzed effects of expectation-managing DPs on visual
attention in high-constraining conversations. The preference to fixate
the selected referent was significantly stronger after encountering inderdaad than after encountering eigenlijk in both time windows (Early:
 = 1.94, SE = 0.50, p < 0.001; Late:  = 266, SE = 0.57,
p < 0.001). The stronger preference to fixate selected referents in the
Inderdaad-condition compared to the Adverb-condition was marginally
significant in both time windows (Early:  = 0.93, SE = 0.47, p = 0.06;
Late:  = 1.05, SE = 0.60, p = 0.09). The preference to fixate the
eventually selected referent after encountering eigenlijk was significantly weaker than after encountering an adverb (Early:  = -1.01,
SE = 0.48, p < 0.05; Late:  = -1.62, SE = 0.58, p < 0.01).
In Experiment 1, we found no evidence for a difference between either
DP condition and the High-Adverb condition in the Early Integration
window; in Experiment 2, we did find a (tendency for a) difference.
Analyses of the combined data revealed an immediate effect of both inderdaad and eigenlijk on visual attention when compared with the Adverbcondition (Inderdaad:  = 0.84, SE = 0.30, p < 0.01; Eigenlijk:
 = -0.85, SE = 0.33, p < 0.05); both effects increased in the Late
Integration time window (Inderdaad:  = 1.04, SE = 0.36, p < 0.01;
Eigenlijk:  = -1.81, SE = 0.40, p < 0.001). Thus, findings from both
experiments together confirm that listeners immediately integrate expectation-managing DPs to guide their visual attention during listening.
To assess whether the increased frequency of eigenlijk in Experiment
2 affects visual attention in the High-Eigenlijk condition, we compared
gaze patterns in this condition between experiments. Results showed no
significant effect of Experiment in either time window (Early:  = 0.11,
SE = 0.52, p = 0.83; Late:  = -1.00, SE = 0.62, p = 0.11), suggesting
that the presence of eigenlijk in medium-constraining contexts did not
modulate its effect on attentional preferences in high-constraining
contexts.
As in Experiment 1, we also assessed to what extent gaze patterns in
the High-Eigenlijk condition are dependent on the final interpretation.
Fig. 9 shows the click-contingent gaze patterns separately for Expected
(left) and Unexpected (right) referent clicks in the High-Eigenlijk condition. The lines representing the Selected Referent (solid) and the
Competitor (dashed) seem to come closer together in the second half of
the response when the Unexpected referent is selected (right panel).
This would suggest that semantic competition from contextually

Click-contingent gaze patterns
We performed the same analyses as in Experiment 1, comparing
click-contingent AoI fixations between conditions in the Early and Late
Integration time windows. In addition, we compared gaze patterns
between Experiments.
We expected gaze patterns to be similar in the High-Adverb and HighInderdaad condition, as these were the same across experiments. We
were especially interested in differences between experiments in the
Medium condition (to what extent does the presence of eigenlijk modulate gaze patterns in less constraining contexts?) and in the HighEigenlijk condition (to what extent does the increased frequency of eigenlijk in the experiment modulate its effect on gaze behavior in
strongly constraining contexts?).
Fig. 7 shows the proportion of click-contingent AoI fixations over
time (from Response onset until Response offset) per condition; Fig. 8
represents the fixation proportions of selected referents and competitors
per condition in the Early Integration (left panel) and Late Integration
window (right panel).
Comparing the panels in Fig. 7 to those in Fig. 3, the gaze patterns
look quite similar across conditions, with the exception of the mediumconstraining conversations. Fixation proportions of Selected referents
and Competitors seem to start diverging later in Experiment 2, suggesting that the presence of eigenlijk in the Response delayed participants' attentional preference for a specific interpretation in mediumconstraining contexts.
Results of a linear mixed effects analysis showed that the preference
to fixate the Selected referent over the Competitor in the MediumEigenlijk condition was not significant in the Early integration window
( = 0.42, SE = 0.43, p = 0.33). In Experiment 1 we did find a significant preference to fixate the to-be-selected referent in the MediumAdverb condition during the Early Integration window. This suggests
that encountering eigenlijk in medium-constraining contexts slows down
attentional preferences. However, a combined analysis of mediumconstraining contexts alone showed no significant difference between
experiments in the Early Integration window ( = 0.72, SE = 0.49,
p = 0.15). Hence, we have no evidence that attentional preferences to
potential discourse referents in medium-constraining contexts were
delayed by the presence of eigenlijk instead of an adverb. In the Late
integration window, the attentional preference for the Selected referent
over the Competitor is significant in the Medium-Eigenlijk condition
( = 2.76, SE = 0.45, p < 0.001); again, an omnibus analysis of
medium-constraining contexts revealed no significant difference

3

203

The final model included random intercepts for participants and items.

Journal of Memory and Language 103 (2018) 191-209

G. van Bergen, H.R. Bosker

Fig. 9. Click-contingent gaze patterns over time for Expected (left) and Unexpected (right) referent clicks in the High-Eigenlijk condition (Experiment 2).

other two conditions. For both time windows, results showed a weaker
preference to fixate Unexpected referents after eigenlijk when compared
with the preference to fixate Expected referents after inderdaad (Early:
 = -2.61, SE = 0.75, p < 0.01; Late:  = 3.05, SE = 0.85,
p < 0.001), as well as after adverbs (Early:  = -1.82, SE = 0.79,
p < 0.05; Late::  = -1.99, SE = 0.72, p < 0.01). A combined analysis of both experiments confirms that across experiments, Unexpected
referents were fixated less after encountering eigenlijk when compared
with Expected referent fixations after encountering inderdaad (Early:
 = -2.13, SE = 0.43, p < 0.001; Late:  = -3.27, SE = 0.51,
p < 0.001) or an adverb (Early:  = -1.42, SE = 0.45, p < 0.01;
Late:  = -2.32, SE = 0.57, p < 0.001). Thus, if participants commit
to a referentially contrastive interpretation of eigenlijk, our findings
show that eigenlijk immediately increases competition from alternative
dialogue interpretations. Again, there were no main effects of
Experiment, nor Experiment by Condition interaction effects in either
time window (all p's > 0.24).
In sum, findings from both experiments together confirm that both
inderdaad and eigenlijk immediately affect visual attention to possible
dialogue continuations, when compared with an adverb, in opposite
directions. We found no evidence that the increased frequency of nonreferential eigenlijk in Experiment 2 influenced effects of eigenlijk on
visual attention in high-constraining contexts, nor that the presence of
eigenlijk modulated visual attention to discourse referents in mediumconstraining dialogues.

expected referents is stronger than from contextually unexpected referents.
Results from a linear mixed-effects regression analysis confirm an
early preference to fixate the to-be-clicked referent ( = 1.30,
SE = 0.38, p < 0.001), but there was no difference between Expected
and Unexpected referents in either of the time windows (Early:
 = 1.07, SE = 0.92, p = 0.26; Late:  = 1.13, SE = 0.89, p = 0.19). In
addition, omnibus analyses revealed that the interaction with
Experiment is not significant in either time window (model comparison,
Early: X2(1) = 0.41, p = 0.52; Late: X2(1) = 1.64, p = 0.20). Thus, results provide no evidence that the effect of eigenlijk on attentional
preferences in high-constraining dialogues is modulated by the increased frequency of non-referential eigenlijk in the experiment.
This was corroborated by analyses of high-constraining trials in
which the Expected referent was clicked. Results show that the preference to fixate Expected referents is stronger after encountering inderdaad than after encountering eigenlijk in both time windows (Early:
 = 1.44, SE = 0.59, p < 0.05; Late:  = 2.32, SE = 0.82, p < 0.01).
There was no evidence for a difference between inderdaad and adverbs
in Expected referent fixations (Early:  = 0.79, SE = 0.48, p = 0.11;
Late:  = 0.71, SE = 0.63, p = 0.27). There was a tendency to fixate
Expected referents less after encountering eigenlijk relative to an adverb
in the Late Integration window,  = -1.61, SE = 0.82, p = 0.06, but
not in the Early Integration window,  = -0.63, SE = 0.63, p = 0.33.
Analysis of the two experiments together reveal a stronger preference to
fixate Expected referents after hearing inderdaad than after encountering an adverb in both time windows (Early:  = 0.73,
SE = 0.33, p < 0.05; Late:  = 0.89, SE = 0.34, p < 0.05).4 Expected
referents tended to be fixated less after encountering eigenlijk relative to
and adverb in the Early integration window ( = -0.67, SE = 0.40,
p = 0.09); the difference was stronger in the Late Integration window
( = -2.01, SE = 0.56, p < 0.001). We found no evidence for a main
effect of Experiment, nor for an Experiment by Condition interaction effect in either time window (all p's > 0.25), Together, these results
provide suggestive evidence that both expectation-managing DPs immediately affected the preference to fixate Expected referents if these
are eventually selected as dialogue continuations, but no evidence that
effects of eigenlijk on attentional preferences dialogues are modulated
by the increased frequency of non-referential eigenlijk in Experiment 2.
We also compared Unexpected click-contingent fixations in the
High-Eigenlijk condition with Expected click-contingent fixations in the

Exploratory analysis: voice-based adaption
We found no evidence that an increase in non-referential uses of
eigenlijk (in Experiment 2) modulated interpretations of eigenlijk in highconstraining contexts, despite ample evidence in the literature showing
that comprehenders' previous language experience influences their
processing of subsequent linguistic input. However, our experimental
manipulation may have been too general to capture adaptation effects.
That is, prior research has shown that comprehenders keep track of
talker-specific idiosyncrasies in various language domains (e.g., phonological, syntactic, pragmatic), and use this knowledge during language processing (e.g., Arnold et al., 2007, van Berkum, van den Brink,
Tesink, Kos, & Hagoort, 2008; Bosker et al., 2014; Eisner & McQueen,
2005; Grodner & Sedivy, 2011; Kamide, 2012; Kraljic & Samuel, 2005;
Trude & Brown-Schmidt, 2011). Recall that the dialogues in our experiments were recorded by two male and two female voices. Maybe
participants, rather than tracking uses of eigenlijk across the board, may
have used speaker voice information to track speaker-specific uses of
eigenlijk.
In Experiment 1, male uses of eigenlijk (64%) were more often

4
Final models included random intercepts for participants and items, as well
as random by-item slopes for Condition.

204

Journal of Memory and Language 103 (2018) 191-209

G. van Bergen, H.R. Bosker

with relevant information in the context, rather than the costs associated with computing a pragmatic inference itself (Grodner et al.,
2010; Kurumada et al., 2014).
Behavioral results showed that eigenlijk was not always interpreted
in the same way: only about half of the time, eigenlijk was interpreted as
encoding a contrast with a referential expectation. In the other half of
the cases, listeners completed dialogues with the contextually most
likely referent. Findings from gaze patterns and completion latencies
reject the possibility that eigenlijk was ignored in these cases: relative to
encountering an adverb, encountering the contrastive cue still increased visual competition from alternative dialogue interpretations,
and yielded delayed completions. As such, our findings underline the
notorious polyfunctionality of discourse markers. With a more traditional paradigm (i.e., with the referent mentioned in the Response rather than replaced by a beep), non-referential interpretations of eigenlijk
would have been experimentally excluded. This may induce an experimental interpretation bias in trials with eigenlijk, thereby decreasing
the ecological validity of our study. Moreover, if dialogues with an
adverb or inderdaad unambiguously ended with the Expected referent,
we would have experimentally increased the probability of a contextually likely discourse continuation in these conditions. As a result,
the additional confirmation from inderdaad may have no longer been
beneficial to the listener, and the difference between inderdaad and
adverbs may have disappeared. Notwithstanding the informativity of
such findings with respect to adaptation during language processing,
we believe that our current findings, obtained with the adapted paradigm, provide a more realistic picture of the function of DPs in everyday conversational interaction, including listeners' uncertainty
about how a dialogue will continue, as well as speakers' use of both
referential and non-referential eigenlijk.
The between-participant variation in behavioral responses suggested that variable interpretations of eigenlijk are not only discoursedependent, but also listener-specific. This finding has important implications for linguistic research on DPs. Both qualitative and quantitative analyses of DPs involve in-depth investigations of the conversational circumstances under which DPs were used by the speaker, from
which researchers infer their communicative intentions. Even in approaches that explicitly acknowledge the interactional aspect of DP use,
researchers infer the ways in which DPs are understood by the addressee from the conversational context in which they were produced
(for instance, by examining the continuation of the conversation).
Whereas such analyses are highly valuable for a better understanding of
DPs, our empirical findings show that DPs can be interpreted differently
by different listeners even if they occur in exactly the same conversational context. As such, we believe that experimental investigations of
their role in discourse understanding are necessary for a full account of
the function of DPs in language.
In Experiment 2, we further explored the nature of individual variation in interpretations of eigenlijk. We concentrated on two factors
potentially involved in individual interpretation biases, namely (1) the
frequency distribution of referential and non-referential uses of eigenlijk
encountered previously, and (2) individual differences in pragmatic
competence. Unfortunately, with respect to this last factor, we were
unable to test theory-driven hypotheses because of the lack of variation
in AQ scores in our sample. More promising results are to be expected
from studies comparing DP interpretation in more heterogeneous populations in terms of pragmatic competence, for instance, in individuals
that are clinically diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder. This being
said, the fact that we found considerable inter-individual variation in
interpretations of eigenlijk, despite relative invariance in inter-individual pragmatic competence, suggests that pragmatic competence
cannot be the sole determinant in explaining variation in interpretations of eigenlijk.
With respect to the first factor, initial analyses provided no evidence
that the increased frequency of non-referential uses of eigenlijk in the
experiment affected interpretations of eigenlijk in high-constraining

interpreted referentially than female uses of eigenlijk (52%); this difference was much smaller in Experiment 2 (53% vs. 50%, respectively).
Note that speaker voice was not counterbalanced within each experiment, male and female voices were associated with different stimuli.
Across experiments, however, stimuli in the High-Eigenlijk condition
were identical, and thus recorded by the same voices. This allowed for
an exploratory analysis of dialogue completions in the High-Eigenlijk
condition, including Voice (male vs. female), Experiment, and their
interaction as independent predictors. Results revealed an Experiment
by Voice interaction (comparing models with vs. without the interaction effect: X2 (2) = 4.04, p < 0.05). Follow-up analyses revealed that,
relative to Experiment 1, participants were less inclined to interpret
male uses of eigenlijk referentially (i.e., fewer Unexpected dialogue
completions) in Experiment 2 (where the frequency of non-referential
uses of eigenlijk increased) (difference 11%;  = -0.87, SE = 0.45,
p = 0.05). By contrast, no difference between Experiments was found
for female uses of eigenlijk (difference 2%;  = -0.09, SE = 0.40,
p = 0.82).
These results provide suggestive evidence that comprehenders were
sensitive to talker-specific idiosyncrasies in eigenlijk use, adapting their
behavior differentially for male and female talkers. Since we have too
few data points for further explorations of voice effects separately for
Unexpected and Expected clicks, we will leave this for future research.
General discussion
The present study set out to investigate how language comprehenders
use interpersonal discourse particles in online discourse understanding.
The combination of offline and online measures enabled us to examine
distinct stages of the interpretation process: we identified how and when
effects of interpersonal discourse particles on interpretation arise,
thereby further specifying and extending theoretical claims about their
conversation-managing function. Moreover, by allowing for variability in
interpretations in our experimental set-up, we embraced and exploited
the notorious polyfunctionality of discourse markers, showing that listeners make rapid and fine-grained inferences about the use of interpersonal discourse particles in conversational interaction.
Encountering inderdaad quickly reduced listeners' attention to alternative discourse continuations during listening, and yielded more
and faster contextually likely dialogue completions relative to encountering an adverb. A linguistic confirmation of inferred expectedness thus proves beneficial for the listener: it strengthens expectations
about the unfolding input, which reduces the amount of cognitive resources spent on distributing probabilities over alternative interpretations, which in turn speeds up the interpretation process. Conversely,
encountering eigenlijk decreased the likelihood of a contextually expected discourse continuation, as reflected in increased visual attention
to alternative interpretations during listening, and more contextually
contrastive dialogue completions. If eigenlijk was interpreted referentially, we found that listeners quickly revised their initial expectation,
as reflected in an immediate attention shift from the contextually expected to the contextually contrastive referent. This finding shows that
the inferred content was readily available to the listener, supporting the
view that pragmatic inferences can be generated immediately (e.g.,
Grodner & Sedivy, 2010; Levinson, 2000). However, this early commitment to a referential interpretation of eigenlijk did not result in faster
dialogue completions: participants experienced sustained visual competition from alternative dialogue interpretations, and were slower to
complete dialogues with the referent that contrasted with the contextually most likely interpretation. This finding is consistent with
studies reporting lingering predictions or interpretations, as measured
by sustained visual attention to initial interpretations that need to be
revised as the linguistic input unfolds (e.g., Corley, 2010; Lowder &
Ferreira, 2016). Moreover, it provides further support for the view that
delays in processing of implicatures reflect additional processing costs
associated with integrating the interpretation of a pragmatic inference
205

Journal of Memory and Language 103 (2018) 191-209

G. van Bergen, H.R. Bosker

Empirically, because of their immediate effects on discourse processing, we believe that interpersonal DPs provide useful tools to further investigate the nature of discourse-based predictions in incremental language processing. For instance, expectation-managing DPs
can be used to investigate to what extent processing of (un)expected
input is modulated if a contextual prediction is made more or less
likely. In the current paradigm, the disambiguating information was
never encountered: participants completed dialogues with the referent
they believed was most likely. Hence, it remains an open question
whether eigenlijk is useful to the comprehender to the extent that its
presence facilitates processing of subsequent unexpected input relative
to a control condition. Moreover, the visual world paradigm limits
possible interpretations to the options presented in the visual display,
whereas comprehenders' discourse models may contain many more
potential interpretations (for discussion, see e.g., Huettig, Rommers, &
Meyer, 2011). Future research could use EEG methodology to investigate whether and to what extent expectation-managing DPs facilitate incremental processing of subsequent (un)expected input.
The present study specifically focused on two discourse particles in
Dutch, but many languages exhibit discourse markers that encode largely comparable basic meanings. For instance, the basic contrastive/
adversative meaning of eigenlijk has also been identified for German
eigentlich (Eckardt, 2009), English actually/in fact (e.g., Aijmer, 2013),
French en fait (e.g., Mortier & Degand, 2009) and Chinese qishi/shishishang (Wang, Tsai, & Yang, 2010). At the same time, however, discourse markers typically lack clear translation equivalents, implying
that the range of possible functions associated with an individual discourse marker varies greatly across languages. For instance, a parallel
corpus study by Mortier and Degand (2009) showed that not all uses of
Dutch eigenlijk are translated with their closest French equivalent en
fait, nor vice versa. Strikingly, almost half of the uses of Dutch eigenlijk
was left untranslated in French, suggesting that Dutch eigenlijk has a
wider range of uses than its French counterpart(s), which may speculatively indicate a further stage of grammaticalization (e.g., Traugott,
2010; Traugott & Dasher, 2002). Our findings showed that listeners
immediately integrated the contrastive information encoded in eigenlijk
to reduce their visual attention to contextually likely discourse referents, irrespective of the attested variation in dialogue completions.
Based on these findings, we would predict discourse markers with similar basic meanings to have similar effects on visual attention, regardless of their full functional range.
Finally, the adapted version of the visual world paradigm introduced here offers a unique opportunity to empirically assess crosslinguistic variation in interpretations of contrastive discourse markers.
We may, for instance, expect a smaller proportion of non-referential
interpretations of contrastive discourse markers with a smaller functional range relative to Dutch eigenlijk. In addition, the adapted paradigm could be used to investigate variation in language learners' interpretations of eigenlijk. Given that interpersonal functions of discourse
markers are notoriously difficult to learn for both first and second
language learners (Fox Tree, 2010), we predict face-saving uses of eigenlijk to be hardest to acquire for learners; we may hence expect the
proportion of non-referential interpretations of eigenlijk to be smaller in
learners, but to increase with proficiency. Future comprehension studies comparing discourse markers across languages and in different
populations may thus build on the present findings to advance our
understanding of their polyfunctionality.

contexts. However, results from an exploratory analysis suggest that
participants were in fact sensitive to frequency distributions of (non-)
referential eigenlijk use at a more fine-grained level. In Experiment 1,
male uses of eigenlijk were more often interpreted referentially than
female uses of eigenlijk, possibly suggesting that male speakers more
often use referential eigenlijk than female speakers in everyday conversational interaction. Results from Experiment 2 provide suggestive
evidence for voice-based adaptation in pragmatic language processing:
participants were less likely to interpret male uses of eigenlijk referentially if their frequency of non-referential use of eigenlijk increased,
whereas no such adaptation effect was found for female voices. We
speculatively relate this voice-based adaptation to a stereotypical difference between men and women, namely the ability to empathize with
another individual. Previous research has shown that women generally
score higher than men on various self-assessed empathy scales (e.g.,
Eisenberg & Lennon, 1983); moreover, empathy has been related to
social language abilities (e.g., Baron, 1995; van den Brink et al., 2012).
On the basis of this stereotypical information, participants in Experiment 1 may have inferred that male speakers are less sensitive to the
social characteristics of the dialogue, and hence interpreted their use of
eigenlijk more referentially. In Experiment 2 (where the proportion of
non-referential uses was increased for all talkers), participants may
have adjusted these stereotypical ideas about male usage of eigenlijk,
resulting in less referential interpretations of male uses of eigenlijk.
Although this analysis was not planned a priori and the results are in
need of replication, findings suggest that situation-specific interpretations of eigenlijk also include inferences about speaker-specific knowledge. Future research could investigate to what extent speaker-specific
variation in DPs use affects online processing of DPs, which the current
data was not designed for. It could for instance reveal whether comprehenders more quickly commit to a referential interpretation of eigenlijk if produced by a male rather than a female speaker.
Given the intersubjective meanings of inderdaad and eigenlijk, our
findings contribute to the evidence that common ground and perspective-taking have immediate effects on incremental language processing,
in line with previous findings from visual world experiments involving
interactive tasks (e.g., Brown-Schmidt & Tanenhaus, 2008; Hanna et al.,
2003). The current experiment did not involve an interactive paradigm,
but we showed that listeners are immediately sensitive to the interpersonal meanings of eigenlijk and inderdaad even when performing a
task as overhearers. This is consistent with findings from Tolins and Fox
Tree (2016), who showed that addressee backchannels influenced
overhearers' processing of unfolding dialogues; in addition, our results
provide further evidence that overhearers can generate predictions
about subsequent input over the turns of multiple speakers (see also
Bogels, Kendrick, & Levinson, 2015). At the same time, "effects of
perspective are likely to be strongest in tasks where participants have
joint goals, common ground is established collaboratively, and exchange of information is negotiated by both parties" (Brown-Schmidt
et al., 2008, p. 1133). As such, it remains an open question whether
comprehenders would be differentially sensitive to interpersonal DP
uses if they actively engage in a conversation. In an fMRI study comparing face-saving indirect speech act processing in addressees and
overhearers, Banakova, van Berkum, Weber, & Hagoort (2015) found
similar activation of neural networks associated with cognitive perspective-taking in addressees and overhearers. Based on this finding,
the authors argue that "cognitive perspective-taking presumably occurs
with any contextualized utterance, for the simple reason that listeners
will want to know what the speaker is really talking about, and what his
or her social intentions are" (p. 87). In addition, they found increased
activation of networks associated with emotional salience and empathy
in addressees relative to overhearers, suggesting increased emotional
involvement in face-saving indirect speech processing if comprehenders
are directly addressed. Future research could investigate to what extent
increased emotional involvement may influence interpretation of facesaving uses of interpersonal DPs in a more interactive task.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the Netherlands Organisation for
Scientific Research (NWO, grant 275-89-022, awarded to the first author). We thank the editor-in-chief and three anonymous reviewers for
valuable comments on earlier versions of this paper, as well as Vera van
`t Hoff, Marlou Rasenberg and Anne Mickan for help with stimulus
design and data acquisition.
206

Journal of Memory and Language 103 (2018) 191-209

G. van Bergen, H.R. Bosker

A. List of 10 stimuli with approximate translations
1

High

Context

Monique is zwanger, en komt haar vriendin Ine
tegen in de kroeg.
Monique is pregnant, and runs into her friend Ine in
a bar.
Question Jij bent zeker de Bob vandaag?You must be the
designated driver today?
Response Ik stond net/inderdaad/eigenlijk op het punt een

2

Medium
Monique komt haar vriendin Ine tegen in een cafeetje in de stad.Monique runs into
her friend Ine in a little bar in the city.

Lust je ook iets te drinken?Would you like a drink?
[cola/wijn] te bestellen.I was just/indeed/actually about to order a [coke/wine].

High

Medium

Context

Puck en Pleun gaan bij Esmee op bezoek die met gym haar arm
Puck en Pleun gaan bij Esmee op bezoek die met gym haar arm
gebroken heeft.Puck en Pleun are visiting Esmee who broke her arm gebroken heeft.Puck en Pleun are visiting Esmee who broke her arm
during gymnastics class.
during gymnastics class.
Question Zullen we iets gezonds voor haar meenemen?Shall we bring her
Zullen we namens de klas iets langsbrengen?Shall we bring her
something healthy?
something on behalf of the class?
Response Het lijkt me best/inderdaad/eigenlijk leuk om een [fruitmand/teddybeer] te geven.I would quite/indeed/actually like to give her a [fruit
basket/teddy bear].

3

High

Medium

Martine en Nancy zitten een zielige film te kijken, als Martine ineens Martine en Nancy zitten tv te kijken als Martine ineens
opstaat.Martine and Nancy are watching TV when Martine
sniffend opstaat.Martine and Nancy are watching a sad movie when
suddenly stands up.
Martine suddenly stands up sniffing
Question Je wilt zeker je tranen wegvegen?Do you want to go whipe your tears? Wat ga je doen?What are you up to?
Response Ik ga even/inderdaad/eigenlijk een pakje [zakdoeken/sigaretten] halen.I'm just/indeed/actually going to get a pack of [tissues/cigarettes].
Context

4

High

Medium

Het is winter en na schooltijd komt Tom Bart tegen in de fietsenstalling.It is Bart en Tom hebben zich voorgenomen om meer te
wintertime, and Tom runs into Bart at the bicycle stand after school.
gaan bewegen.Bart and Tom intend to exercise more.
Question Jij gaat toch ook mee naar de ijsbaan?You are joining us to the ice rink, right? Ga je vandaag nog wat sportiefs doen?Are you going to
do something sporty today?
Response Ik heb best/inderdaad/eigenlijk zin om lekker te [schaatsen/fietsen] vanmiddag.I quite/indeed/actually feel like [ice skating/cycling] this
afternoon.
Context

5

High

Medium

Context

Yvette komt lijkbleek thuis van de kermis.Yvette comes home from the fair Yvette komt thuis en ziet lijkbleekYvette comes home
looking white as a sheet.
looking white as a sheet.
Question Had je weer last van hoogtevrees?Did your fear of heights act up again?
Wat is er met jou aan de hand?What is up with you?
Response Ik werd helemaal/inderdaad/eigenlijk niet goed in het [reuzenrad/spookhuis] vanmiddag.I got really/indeed/actually unwell in the [Ferris
wheel/haunted house] this afternoon.

6

High

Medium

Context

Na een concert in het stadion komt Loek Sabine tegen.After a
Na een concert in het stadion komt Loek Sabine tegen.After a
concert at the stadium, Loek runs into Sabine.
concert at the stadium, Loek runs into Sabine.
Question Ga je ook met het openbaar vervoer terug naar de stad?Are you also Hoe ga jij naar huis?How are you going home?
going back to the city by public transport?
Response Ik sta hier/inderdaad/eigenlijk al een tijdje op een ... te wachten.I have here/indeed/actually been waiting for a [bus/taxi] for a little while.

207

Journal of Memory and Language 103 (2018) 191-209

G. van Bergen, H.R. Bosker

7

High

Medium

Context

Op oudjaarsavond komt Fred met een auto vol dozen terug uit de Fred en zijn buurman komen elkaar vlak na oud en nieuw
stad.On New Year's eve, Fred returns from the city with a car full of
tegen.Fred and his neighbour run into each other right after New
boxes.
Year's day.
Question Zo te zien ga je weer knallendhet jaar uit?Looks like you are ending Heb je ook een dure feestmaand gehad?Did you have an
the year with a bang?
expensive holiday month, too?
Response Ik heb dit jaar/inderdaad/eigenlijk voor een kapitaal aan [vuurwerk /oliebollen] uitgegeven.I have this year/indeed/actually spent a
fortune on [fireworks/Dutch New Year's snack].

8

High

Medium

Context

Hanneke brengt een bezoek aan een brouwerij in de stad.Hanneke Hanneke zit in een knus cafeetje in haar lievelingsstad.Hanneke is
is visiting a brewery in the city.
in a cosy bar in her favourite city.
Question Lust je iets van de tap?Would you like something on tap?
Lust je nog iets te drinken?Would you like another drink?
Response Ik wil ontzettend/inderdaad/eigenlijk graag jullie nieuwste [bier/cocktail] proberen.I would really/indeed/actually like to try your newest
[beer/cocktail].

9

High

Medium

Context

Op een zonnige middag heeft Casper zijn moeder aan de telefoon.On Op een middag heeft Casper zijn moeder aan de telefoon.On an
a sunny day Casper is on the phone with his mother.
afternoon, Casper is on the phone with his mother.
Question Ga je straks buiten eten met dit mooie weer?Are you going to eat
Heb je nog plannen vandaag?Do you have any plans for today?
oustide with this beautiful weather?
Response Ik ga gezellig/inderdaad/eigenlijk met vrienden [barbecueen/poolen] vanavond.I will cozily/indeed/actually be [barbecuing/playing pool]
with friends tonight.

10

High

Medium

Context

De avond voor zijn zoontjes verjaardag komt Henk de trap
De avond voor zijn zoontjes verjaardag komt Henk de trap
afgestommeld.The evening before his son's birthday, Henk comes
afgestommeld.The evening before his son's birthday, Henk comes
stumbling down the stairs.
stumbling down the stairs.
Question Je hebt zeker de versiering van zolder gehaald?Were you getting the Wat was je op zolder aan het doen?What were you doing in the
decorations from the attic?
attic?
Response Ik heb alvast/inderdaad/eigenlijk de doos met [slingers/kadootjes] gepakt.I have already/indeed/actually taken the box with [garlands/presents].

van Berkum, J. J., van den Brink, D., Tesink, C. M., Kos, M., & Hagoort, P. (2008). The
neural integration of speaker and message. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 20,
580-591.
Bogels, S., Kendrick, K. H., & Levinson, S. C. (2015). Never say no... How the brain interprets the pregnant pause in conversation. PLoS One, 10, e0145474.
Bosker, H. R., Quene, H., Sanders, T. J. M., & de Jong, N. H. (2014). Native `um's elicit
prediction of low-frequency referents, but non-native `um's do not. Journal of Memory
and Language, 75, 104-116.
van den Brink, D., van Berkum, J. J. A., Bastiaansen, M. C. M., Tesink, C. M. J. Y., Kos, M.,
Buitelaar, J. K., & Hagoort, P. (2012). Empathy matters: ERP evidence for inter-individual differences in social language processing. Social, Cognitive and Affective
Neuroscience, 7, 173-182.
Brodeur, M., Dionne-Dosti, E., Montreuil, T., & Lepage, M. (2010). The Bank of
Standardized Stimuli (BOSS), a New Set of 480 normative photos of objects to be used
as visual stimuli in cognitive research. PLoS ONE, 5, e10773.
Brown-Schmidt, S., & Tanenhaus, M. K. (2008). Real-time investigation of referential
domains in unscripted conversation: A targeted language game approach. Cognitive
Science, 32, 643-684.
Brown-Schmidt, S., & Hanna, J. (2011). Talking in another person's shoes: Incremental
perspective-taking in language processing. Dialogue & Discourse, 2, 11-33.
Brown-Schmidt, S., & Heller, D. (2018). Perspective-taking during conversation. In G.
Gaskell, & S. A. Rueschemeyer (Eds.). Oxford Handbook of Psycholinguistics(2nd ed.).
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Canestrelli, A., Mak, W. M., & Sanders, T. J. M. (2012). Causal connectives in discourse
processing: How differences in subjectivity are reflected in eye movements. Language
and Cognitive Processes, 28, 1394-1413.
Clark, H., & Fox Tree, J. E. (2002). Using uh and um in spontaneous speaking. Cognition,
84, 73-111.
Corley, M. (2010). Making predictions from speech with repairs: Evidence from eye
movements. Language and Cognitive Processes, 25, 706-727.
Corley, M., & Stewart, O. W. (2008). Hesitation disfluencies in spontaneous speech: The
meaning of um. Language and Linguistics Compass, 2, 589-602.
Corley, M., MacGregor, L. J., & Donaldson, D. I. (2007). It's the way that you, er, say it:
Hesitations in speech affect language comprehension. Cognition, 105, 658-668.
Cozijn, R., Commandeur, E., Vonk, W., & Noordman, L. (2011). The time course of the use

References
Aijmer, K. (2002). English discourse particles. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Aijmer, K. (2013). Understanding pragmatic markers: A variational pragmatic approach.
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Aijmer, K., & Simon-Vandenbergen, A. M. (2004). A model and a methodology for the
study of pragmatic markers: The semantic field of expectation. Journal of Pragmatics,
36, 1781-1805.
Altmann, G. T., & Kamide, Y. (1999). Incremental interpretation at verbs: Restricting the
domain of subsequent reference. Cognition, 73, 247-264.
Arnold, J. E., Hudson Kam, C. L., & Tanenhaus, M. K. (2007). If you say thee uh you are
describing something hard: The on-line attribution of disfluency during reference
comprehension. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
33, 914-930.
Baron-Cohen, S. (1995). Mindblindness: An essay on autism and theory of mind. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Baron-Cohen, S., Wheelwright, S., Skinner, R., Martin, J., & Clucley, E. (2001). The
autism-spectrum quotient (AQ): Evidence from Asperger syndrome/high-functioning
autism, males and females, scientists and mathematicians. Journal of Autism and
Developmental Disorders, 31, 5-17.
Barr, D. J., Levy, R., Scheepers, C., & Tily, H. (2013). Random effects structure for confirmatory hypothesis testing: Keep it maximal. Journal of Memory and Language, 68,
255-278.
Banakova, J., van Berkum, J., Weber, K., & Hagoort, P. (2015). A job interview in the
MRI scanner: How does indirectness affect addressees and overhearers?
Neuropsychologia, 76, 79-91.
Bates, D., Maechler, M., Bolker, B., & Walker, S. (2015). Fitting linear mixed-effects
models Using lme4. Journal of Statistical Software, 67, 1-48.
van Bergen, G., van Gijn, R., Hogeweg, L., & Lestrade, S. (2011). Discourse marking and
the subtle art of mind-reading: The case of Dutch eigenlijk. Journal of Pragmatics, 43,
3877-3892.
van Bergen, G., & Flecken, M. (2017). Putting things in new places: Linguistic experience
modulates the predictive power of placement verb semantics. Journal of Memory and
Language, 92, 26-42.

208

Journal of Memory and Language 103 (2018) 191-209

G. van Bergen, H.R. Bosker

of Memory and Language, 49, 133-156.
Kaschak, M. P., & Glenberg, A. M. (2004). This construction needs learned. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 133, 450-467.
Kim, C. S., Gunlogson, C., Tanenhaus, M. K., & Runner, J. T. (2015). Context-driven expectations about focus alternatives. Cognition, 139, 28-49.
Knoeferle, P., Crocker, M., Scheepers, C., & Pickering, M. (2005). The influence of the
immediate visual context on incremental thematic role-assignment: Evidence from
eye-movements in depicted events. Cognition, 95, 95-127.
Koornneef, A. W., & Sanders, T. J. (2013). Establishing coherence relations in discourse:
The influence of implicit causality and connectives on pronoun resolution. Language
and Cognitive Processes, 28, 1169-1206.
Kraljic, T., & Samuel, A. G. (2005). Perceptual learning for speech: Is there a return to
normal? Cognitive Psychology, 51, 141-178.
Kulakova, E., & Nieuwland, M. S. (2016). Pragmatic skills predict online counterfactual
comprehension: Evidence from the N400. Cognitive, Affective and Behavioral
Neuroscience, 16, 814-824.
Kurumada, C., Brown, M., Bibyk, S., Pontillo, D., & Tanenhaus, M. K. (2014). Is it or isn't
it: Listeners make rapid use of prosody to infer speaker meanings. Cognition, 122,
335-342.
Kuznetsova, A., Brockhoff, P. B., & Christensen, R. H. B. (2017). lmerTest package: Tests
in linear mixed effects models. Journal of Statistical Software, 82, 1-26.
Levinson, S. C. (2000). Presumptive meanings. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Levinson, S. C. (1979). Pragmatics and social deixis: Reclaiming the notion of conventional
implicature (pp. 206-223). UC Berkeley: Berkeley Linguistics Society.
Lowder, M. W., & Ferreira, F. (2016). Prediction in the processing of repair disfluencies:
Evidence from the Visual-World paradigm. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 42, 1400-1416.
Maschler, Y., & Schiffrin, D. (2015). Discourse markers: Language, meaning, and context.
In D. Tannen, H. Hamilton, & D. Schiffrin (Eds.). The handbook of discourse analysis
(pp. 189-221). (2nd ed.). Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
Mortier, L., & Degand, L. (2009). Adversative discourse markers in contrast: The need for
a combined corpus approach. International Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 14, 338-366.
Nieuwland, M. S., Ditman, T., & Kuperberg, G. R. (2010). On the incrementality of
pragmatic processing: An ERP investigation of informativeness and pragmatic abilities. Journal of Memory and Language, 63, 324-346.
Nieuwland, M. S. (2015). The truth before and after: Brain potentials reveal automatic
activation of event knowledge during sentence comprehension. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 27, 2215-2228.
Norris, D., McQueen, J. M., & Cutler, A. (2003). Perceptual learning in speech. Cognitive
Psychology, 47, 204-238.
Oostdijk, N. (2000). Het Corpus Gesproken Nederlands. Nederlandse Taalkunde, 5,
280-284.
Politzer-Ahles, S., Xiang, M., & Almeida, D. (2017). "Before" and "after": Investigating the
relationship between temporal connectives and chronological ordering using eventrelated potentials. Plos ONE, 12, e0175199.
Potts, C. (2007). Into the conventional-implicature dimension. Philosophy Compass, 2,
665-679.
Potts, C. (2015). Presupposition and implicature. In S. Lappin, & C. Fox (Eds.). The
handbook of contemporary semantic theory (pp. 168-202). (2nd ed.). Oxford: WileyBlackwell.
Rommers, J., Meyer, A. S., Praamstra, P., & Huettig, F. (2013). The contents of predictions
in sentence comprehension: Activation of the shape of objects before they are referred
to. Neuropsychologia, 51, 437-447.
R Core Team (2015). R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R
Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. URL: < http://www.Rproject.org/ > .
Schegloff, E. A. (2010). Some other "uh(m)"s. Discourse and Society, 47, 130-174.
Schiffrin, D. (1987). Discourse markers. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Scholman, M. C. J., Rohde, H., & Demberg, V. (2017). "On the one hand" as a cue to
anticipate upcoming discourse structure. Journal of Memory and Language, 97, 47-60.
Sedivy, J. C. (2002). Invoking discourse-based contrast sets and resolving syntactic ambiguities. Journal of Memory and Language, 46, 341-370.
Smith, S., & Jucker, A. (2002). Discourse markers as turns: Evidence for the role of interactional sequence. In A. Fetzer, & C. Meierkord (Eds.). Rethinking sequentiality:
Linguistics meets conversational interaction (Pragmatics & Beyond New Series 103) (pp.
151-178). Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Tanenhaus, M. K., Spivey-Knowlton, M., Eberhard, K., & Sedivy, J. (1995). Integration of
visual and linguistic information during spoken language comprehension. Science,
268, 1632-1634.
Tolins, J., & Fox Tree, J. E. (2016). Overhearers use addressee backchannels in dialog
comprehension. Cognitive Science, 40, 1412-1434.
Traugott, E. C. (2010). Revisiting subjectification and intersubjectification. In K. Davidse,
L. Vandelanotte, & H. Cuyckens (Eds.). Subjectification, Intersubjectification and
Grammaticalization (pp. 29-71). Berlin: Mouton De Gruyter.
Traugott, E. C., & Dasher, R. B. (2002). Regularity in semantic change. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Trude, A. M., & Brown-Schmidt, S. (2011). Talker-specific perceptual adaptation during
online speech perception. Language and Cognitive Processes, 27, 979-1001.
Verhagen, A. (2005). Constructions of intersubjectivity. Discourse, syntax, and cognition.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wang, Y.-F., Tsai, P.-H., & Yang, Y.-T. (2010). Objectivity, subjectivity and intersubjectivity: Evidence from qishi (`actually') and shishishang (`in fact') in spoken
Chinese. Journal of Pragmatics, 42, 705-727.
Xiang, M., & Kuperberg, G. (2015). Reversing expectations during discourse comprehension. Language, Cognition and Neuroscience, 30, 648-672.

of implicit causality information in the processing of pronouns: A visual world
paradigm study. Journal of Memory and Language, 64, 381-403.
Degand, L., Cornillie, B., & Pietrandrea, P. (Eds.). (2013). Discourse markers and modal
particles: Categorization and description. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Delaney-Busch, N., Morgan, E., Lau, E., & Kuperberg, G. (2018). Comprehenders rationally adapt semantic predictions to the statistics of the local environment: a Bayesian
model of trial-by-trial N400 amplitudes. In E. Davelaar, G. Gunzelmann, H. Howes, &
T. Tenbrink (Eds.). Proceedings of the 39th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society. London: Cognitive Science Society.
Diewald, G. (2010). On some problem areas in grammaticalization studies. In K. Stathi, E.
Gehweiler, & E. Konig (Eds.). Grammaticalization: Current views and issues (Studies in
Language Companion Series 119 (pp. 17-50). Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John
Benjamins.
Drenhaus, H., Demberg, V., Kohne, J., & Delogu, F. (2014). Incremental and predictive
discourse processing based on causal and concessive discourse markers: ERP studies
on German and English. In Proceedings of the 36th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (CogSci 2014).
Eckardt, R. (2009). The real, the apparent, and what is eigentlich. Oslo Studies in Language,
1, 77-108.
Eisenberg, N., & Lennon, R. (1983). Sex differences in empathy and related capacities.
Psychological Bulletin, 94, 100-131.
Eisner, F., & McQueen, J. M. (2005). The specificity of perceptual learning in speech
processing. Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics, 67, 224-238.
Fine, A., Jaeger, T. F., Farmer, T., & Qian, T. (2013). Rapid expectation adaptation during
syntactic comprehension. Plos One, 8, e77661.
Finlayson, I. R., & Corley, M. (2012). Disfluency in dialogue: An intentional signal from
the speaker? Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 19, 921-928.
Fischer, K. (2006). Approaches to discourse particles (studies in pragmatics), Vol. 1.
Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Fischer, K. (2014). Discourse markers. In K. Schneider, & A. Barron (Vol. Eds.), Pragmatics
of discourse (handbooks of pragmatics): Vol. 3, (pp. 271-294). Berlin: Mouton de
Gruyter.
Fox Tree, J. E., & Schrock, J. C. (1999). Discourse markers in spontaneous speech: Oh
what a difference an Oh makes. Journal of Memory and Language, 40, 280-295.
Fox Tree, J. E., & Schrock, J. C. (2002). Basic meanings of you know and I mean. Journal of
Pragmatics, 34, 727-747.
Fox Tree, J. E. (2001). Listeners' uses of um and uh in speech comprehension. Memory &
Cognition, 29, 320-326.
Fox Tree, J. E. (2010). Discourse markers across speakers and settings. Language &
Linguistics Compass, 4, 269-281.
Fraser, B. (1999). What are discourse markers? Journal of Pragmatics, 31, 931-952.
Gerwien, J., & Rudka, M. (in press). Expectation changes over time: How long it takes to
process focus imposed by German `sogar'. In: I. Recio, L. Nadal, A. Cruz, & O. Loureda
(Eds.), Methodological approaches to discourse markers (Pragmatics and beyond series).
Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole, & J. L. Morgan (Eds.). Syntax and
Semantics, volume 3: Speech Acts (pp. 41-58). New York: Academic Press.
Grodner, D. J., Klein, N. M., Carbary, K. M., & Tanenhaus, M. K. (2010). "Some", and
possibly all, scalar inferences are not delayed: Evidence for immediate pragmatic
enrichment. Cognition, 116, 42-55.
Grodner, D., & Sedivy, J. (2011). The effect of speaker-specific information on pragmatic
inferences. In E. A. Gibson, & N. J. Pearlmutter (Eds.). The processing and acquisition of
reference (pp. 239-271). Cambridge: MIT Press.
Hagoort, P., & Levinson, S. C. (2014). Neuropragmatics. In M. S. Gazzaniga, & G. R.
Mangun (Eds.). The cognitive neurosciences (pp. 667-674). (5th ed.). Cambridge, Mass:
MIT Press.
Hanna, J. E., & Tanenhaus, M. K. (2004). Pragmatic effects on reference resolution in a
collaborative task: Evidence from eye movements. Cognitive Science, 28, 105-115.
Hanna, J. E., Tanenhaus, M. K., & Trueswell, J. (2003). The effects of common ground and
perspective on domains of referential interpretation. Journal of Memory and Language,
49, 43-61.
Harrington Stack, C. M., James, A. N., & Watson, D. G. (2018). A failure to replicate rapid
syntactic adaptation in comprehension. Memory & Cognition. https://doi.org/10.
3758/s13421-018-0808-6.
Hoekstra, R. A., Bartels, M., Cath, D. C., & Boomsma, D. I. (2008). Factor structure, reliability and criterion validity of the Autism-Spectrum Quotient (AQ): A study in
Dutch population and patient groups. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders,
38, 1555-1566.
Horton, W. S., & Keysar, B. (1996). When do speakers take into account common ground?
Cognition, 59, 91-117.
Huang, Y. T., & Snedeker, J. (2018). Some inferences still take time: Prosody, predictability, and the speed of scalar implicatures. Cognitive Psychology, 102, 105-126.
Huettig, F., Rommers, J., & Meyer, A. S. (2011). Using the visual world paradigm to study
language processing: A review and critical evaluation. Acta Psychologica, 137,
151-171.
Keysar, B., Barr, D. J., & Horton, W. S. (1998). The egocentric basis of language use:
Insights from a processing approach. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 7,
46-50.
Keysar, B., Barr, D. J., Balin, J. A., & Brauner, J. S. (2000). Taking perspective in conversation: The role of mutual knowledge in comprehension. Psychological Science, 11,
32-38.
Kamide, Y. (2012). Learning individual talkers' structural preferences. Cognition, 124,
66-71.
Kamide, Y., Altmann, G., & Haywood, S. (2003). The time-course of prediction in incremental sentence processing: Evidence from anticipatory eye movements. Journal

209

