Journal of Memory and Language 121 (2021) 104264

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Memory and Language
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jml

The influence of prior knowledge on the formation of detailed and
durable memories
B. Bellana a, c, *, R. Mansour b, N. Ladyka-Wojcik c, C.L. Grady c, d, e, *, M. Moscovitch c, d, *
a

Department of Psychological & Brain Sciences, Johns Hopkins University, United States
Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, United States
c
Department of Psychology, University of Toronto, Canada
d
Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest, Canada
e
Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Canada
b

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Knowledge
Learning
Memory
Episodic
Semantics
Schema

Prior knowledge often improves recognition, but its relationship to the retrieval of memory detail is unclear.
Resource-based accounts of recognition suggest that familiar stimuli are more efficiently encoded into memory,
thus freeing attentional resources to encode additional details from a study episode. However, schema-based
theories would predict that activating prior knowledge can lead to the formation of more generalized repre
sentations in memory. Across a series of four experiments, we examined the relationship between prior
knowledge and memory for extrinsic context (i.e., extra-item details from the surrounding study episode) and
intrinsic context (i.e., memory for the precise intra-item features of the studied target itself). Familiar stimuli
(famous faces and popular foods/beverages) were associated with better memory for extrinsic context, oper
ationalized as Remember responses and objective source memory accuracy. Self-reported degree of prior
knowledge associated with a given image was also predictive of this effect. Prior knowledge improved recog
nition memory during a surprise delayed recognition test, even under conditions in which study was uninten
tional, supporting the idea of efficient encoding. Critically, in a paradigm in which recognition required the
correct rejection of highly perceptually similar lures, prior knowledge was associated with more false alarms. Our
results suggest that stimuli associated with prior knowledge are indeed efficiently encoded into memory, freeing
more attentional resources to encode extrinsic context. This benefit, however, may come at the cost of memory
precision for the item itself. By examining extrinsic and intrinsic context separately, we demonstrate that
resource and schema-based theories provide complementary accounts of how prior knowledge influences
memory detail.

Introduction
Prior knowledge supports our ability to form new memories. For
example, item memory is markedly better for familiar as compared to
unfamiliar faces (Backman, 1991; Bird, Davies, Ward, & Burgess, 2011;
Klatzky & Forrest, 1984; Yarmey, 1971). In many of these experiments,
the presence of prior knowledge was incidental to the recognition
memory decision and yet studied faces were much more likely to be
accurately recognized if they were of individuals that were already
familiar to the participants (e.g., famous actors). This benefit of prior
knowledge on item memory is by no means limited to faces. Studies of
expertise have used a wide range of stimuli to demonstrate a positive
relationship between knowledge and item recognition (e.g., chess:

Goldin, 1979; baseball: Chiesi, Spilich, & Voss, 1979; medical images:
Evans et al., 2011; Myles-Worsley, Johnston, & Simons, 1988; own-race
effects: Goldstein & Chance, 1980; mountain scenes: Kawamura, Suzuki,
& Morikawa, 2007). Functional neuroimaging experiments also have
demonstrated clear differences in the brain when prior knowledge is
available as opposed to when it is not (Bar, Aminoff, & Ishai, 2008; Bein,
Reggev, & Maril, 2020; Brod, Lindenberger, & Shing, 2017; Brod,
Werkle-Bergner, & Shing, 2013; Chen et al., 2016; Gobbini & Haxby,
2007; Liu, Grady, & Moscovitch, 2016; Poppenk, Moscovitch, & McIn
tosh, 2016; van Kesteren, Ruiter, Fernandez, & Henson, 2012; van
Kesteren, Rijpkema, Ruiter, Morris, & Fernandez, 2014; van Kesteren,
Rijpkema, & Ruiter, 2010). Overall, prior knowledge appears to be an
important determinant of learning and memory.

* Corresponding authors at: Department of Psychology, University of Toronto, Canada.
E-mail addresses: bbellana@jhu.edu (B. Bellana), cgrady@research.baycrest.org (C.L. Grady), momos@psych.utoronto.ca (M. Moscovitch).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2021.104264
Received 27 April 2020; Received in revised form 25 May 2021; Accepted 26 May 2021
Available online 9 June 2021
0749-596X/(c) 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

B. Bellana et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 121 (2021) 104264

Despite a pronounced item memory benefit, it remains unclear
whether prior knowledge is associated with the formation of more
detailed memory representations. To operationalize memory detail, we
turn to the distinction between intrinsic and extrinsic context described
by Ecker, Zimmer, and Groh-Bordin (2007a) and Mulligan (2011).
Extrinsic context refers to memory for extra-item details from the
encoding context (i.e., source memory), such as the background on
which a stimulus was presented, which stimuli were spatially or
temporally adjacent to the target item, or even what the individual's
thoughts and mental states were at encoding. Intrinsic context refers to
the granularity of intra-item details in memory, or the level of grain at
which we are able to encode the physical properties of the stimulus it
self, ranging from detail-impoverished to high-fidelity perceptually-rich
memory representations. These two dimensions of memory detail have
been posited to rely on separable types of representations in memory
(Ecker et al., 2007a; Ecker, Zimmer, & Groh-Bordin, 2007b), are
differentially impacted by certain encoding manipulations (e.g., gener
ation effect; Mulligan, 2011; Mulligan, Lozito, & Rosner, 2006), are
associated with different patterns of performance in old age (Spencer &
Raz, 1995; Troyer, Winocur, Craik, & Moscovitch, 1999) and, therefore,
provide a concrete operationalization of memory detail for our pur
poses. Though memory detail certainly contributes to the item recog
nition benefits associated with prior knowledge (e.g., via memory
strength; Wixted, 2007), item recognition often employs binary old-new
decisions that fail to measure either type of detail directly. Therefore, it
remains an open question to what extent prior knowledge boosts
memory source and detail in addition to overall recognition.
Should prior knowledge afford the formation of more detailed
memories? Resource-based accounts contend that prior knowledge
benefits memory as familiar stimuli are easier to chunk and thus less
demanding on limited attentional resources at encoding (DeWitt,
Knight, Hicks, & Ball, 2012; Diana & Reder, 2006; Popov & Reder, 2020;
Reder et al., 2013). If familiar stimuli require less attentional resources
than unfamiliar stimuli, more resources should also be available to
encode additional details from the study episode. Studies of associative
and source memory are consistent with this hypothesis, demonstrating
that the more familiar we are with a stimulus, whether via preexperimental knowledge (Brandt, Cooper, & Dewhurst, 2005; DeWitt
et al., 2012; Horry, Wright, & Tredoux, 2010; Liu et al., 2016; Long, Prat,
Johns, Morris, & Jonathan, 2008; Long & Prat, 2002; Reder et al., 2013)
or repeated exposure within an experiment (Reder, Liu, Keinath, &
Popov, 2016), the more likely we are to bind the studied target to its
context or form new associations. Studies of visual working memory also
show that we are better able to hold perceptual details in mind for
stimuli that are familiar (e.g., upright faces) as compared to unfamiliar
ones (e.g., inverted faces) (Curby & Gauthier, 2007; Curby, Glazek, &
Gauthier, 2009; Jackson & Raymond, 2008; Scolari, Vogel, & Awh,
2008). Also, familiar stimuli are broadly less demanding on working
memory resources (Brady, Stormer, & Alvarez, 2016), again consistent
with predictions from resource-based accounts (see also, Shen, Popov,
Delahay, & Reder, 2018).
The memory benefits of prior knowledge also have been attributed to
schemas. According to schema theory, stimuli associated with prior
knowledge activate related knowledge structures into which new
learning can be assimilated (Alba & Hasher, 1983; Bein, Trzewik, &
Maril, 2019; Bransford & Johnson, 1972; Ghosh & Gilboa, 2014; Gilboa
& Marlatte, 2017). Activating existing knowledge structures can support
new learning, but this benefit tends to be specific to information that is
consistent with existing knowledge. Information that is inconsistent
with schemas, on the other hand, can cause interference and is more
difficult to learn (McClelland, 2013; McClelland, McNaughton, &
O'Reilly, 1995). Neural models of schema-based learning further posit
that the activation of existing knowledge structures can down-regulate
hippocampal activity and make it less likely that we encode new de
tails (van Kesteren et al., 2012). Inconsistent information, on the other
hand, elicits a prediction error which upregulates hippocampal

encoding of details from our surroundings (Bein, Duncan, & Davachi,
2020; Kumaran & Maguire, 2007; van Kesteren et al., 2012). Such a
mechanism should also have general consequences for learning of
arbitrary details from a study episode. For example, when studying a
familiar stimulus in a recognition memory paradigm, one should expect
it to evoke prior knowledge while simultaneously failing to elicit a
prediction error, amounting to a more generalized and detailimpoverished memory. A similar generalization effect can be observed
when participants have some way of labelling a target item during study
(e.g., a name), again resulting in learned representations that are less
context-specific than when they are studied without a label (Armann,
Jenkins, & Burton, 2016; Schwartz & Yovel, 2016). This kind of
abstraction process is central to many schema-based accounts of
learning and memory, in which activating a knowledge framework al
lows for the robust encoding of the central elements of an episode while
simultaneously reducing the saliency of idiosyncratic details that are less
likely to occur again (Alba & Hasher, 1983; Gilboa & Marlatte, 2017;
Sekeres et al., 2016).
Resource-based and schema theories differ in their predictions about
how prior knowledge should affect memory detail. The two theories,
however, may complement one another if we consider the constituent
elements of extrinsic and intrinsic context separately. Specifically, the
generalizing effect associated with schemas may be specific to intrinsic
context. Take the example of studying a famous face in the context of a
recognition memory experiment. At encoding, a famous face may evoke
general schematic associations (e.g., its name, its typical appearance, its
semantic or autobiographical associations, etc.). By activating these
associations, the study episode may be easily recoded as a meaningful
chunk of experience - requiring fewer resources to encode and, in turn,
leaving more attentional resources available to encode extrinsic context
from the study episode (e.g, DeWitt et al., 2012; Diana & Reder, 2006;
Popov & Reder, 2020; Reder et al., 2013). This efficient encoding pro
cess, however, may lead to a loss of intrinsic context in memory. For
example, if famous faces trigger existing representations of the appear
ance of a given person, this schematic information may interfere with
the encoding of their particular appearance in a new study episode (e.g.,
McClelland, 2013; van Kesteren et al., 2012). In a related idea to
interference, the process of chunking itself may be associated with in
formation loss depending on how it is operationalized. Chunking is the
process of recoding multiple features (e.g., a study episode) into a single
unit in memory (de Groot, 1965; Gobet et al., 2001; Gobet & Simon,
1998; Miller, 1956) and consequently can be thought of as an example of
data compression. Data compression schemes are commonly divided
into two classes: lossless vs. lossy compression. Lossless compression
allows for the perfect reconstruction of the original data from its com
pressed form, while lossy compression permits information loss to allow
for more substantial compression (Sayood, 2003; see also Nassar,
Helmers, & Frank, 2018; Norris & Kalm, 2018). Compression exploits
the redundancy in an input stream. Simple, structured, low-dimensional
inputs can be easily compressed and reconstructed from memory (e.g.,
Mathy & Feldman, 2012), while complex multifeatured stimuli like faces
may be difficult to compress without losing some stimulus information.
Therefore, the efficient chunking of familiar faces, for example, may
come at the cost of a more generalized representation of the face itself (i.
e., loss of intrinsic context) despite facilitating the encoding of extrinsic
context from the study episode. Unfamiliar faces, which lack associa
tions with prior knowledge, will instead be more difficult to chunk and
thus may maintain their intra-item fidelity without leaving enough re
sources available to encode extra-item details. Considering the constit
uent elements of memory detail separately allows for the possibility that
prior knowledge simultaneously facilitates the encoding of extrinsic
context while impairing the encoding of intrinsic context, thus acting as
a potential bridge across resource and schema-based accounts. To our
knowledge, no work has yet compared the influence of prior knowledge
on these separable aspects of memory detail.
In a series of 4 experiments, we tested this possibility by examining
2

B. Bellana et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 121 (2021) 104264

how prior knowledge related to extrinsic and intrinsic context during
recognition. Experiments 1-3 focus on extrinsic context and Experiment
4 tests intrinsic context. In Experiment 1, participants encoded a series
of famous and non-famous faces. Memory for extrinsic context was
assessed using subjective and objective measures of source memory. To
provide a point of comparison for prior knowledge, we also included a
manipulation of how long the faces were onscreen during encoding (1 or
4s). Experiment 2 examined whether participants' self-reported degree
of familiarity with famous faces was able to predict benefits in extrinsic
context. Experiment 3 generalized our findings to another class of
stimuli: branded foods and beverages. Finally, Experiment 4 examined
intrinsic context to directly test whether prior knowledge was associated
with the formation of higher (or lower)-grain representations of the
studied stimulus itself. To this end, we modified our paradigm based on
the mnemonic similarity task (MST) (Kirwan & Stark, 2007; Stark,
Yassa, Lacy, & Stark, 2013), to test whether prior knowledge would
continue to support accurate recognition even when it required the
correct rejection of highly-similar lures.
In addition to improving performance on an immediate memory test,
encoding information into pre-existing knowledge structures can facil
itate neocortical learning and consolidation. Prior knowledge facilitates
the formation of durable memories more quickly than expected by
standard hippocampal learning of novel information (McClelland, 2013;
Sharon, Moscovitch, & Gilboa, 2011; Tse et al., 2007; for related dis
cussions, see Antony, Ferreira, Norman, & Wimber, 2017; Gilboa &
Marlatte, 2017). Benefits of prior knowledge on memory consolidation
have also been reported to extend beyond intentional learning, carrying
into incidental learning (e.g., Wattenmaker, 1999). Therefore, we also
examined the role of prior knowledge on the formation of durable
memories in Experiment 2 and 3 via a surprise delayed recognition test.
To preview our results, we observed a reliable benefit of prior
knowledge on the formation of detailed memories, using both subjective
and objective measures of extra-item detail. This effect was greater than
that of encoding duration and generalized across both stimulus classes.
The degree of prior knowledge associated with a stimulus predicted the
likelihood of recollecting extrinsic context and the benefit of prior
knowledge persisted into delayed recognition, even under conditions of
incidental encoding. Prior knowledge, however, was associated with
more false alarms to highly perceptually similar lures - suggesting a loss
of intrinsic context when encoding familiar stimuli. Overall, our results
show that the availability of prior knowledge at encoding supports
extrinsic context at the cost of intrinsic context - providing novel evi
dence for an important link between resource and schema-based ac
counts of knowledge-driven learning.

based on previous studies of prior knowledge and memory (Bird et al.,
2011; Brandt et al., 2005; Liu et al., 2016; Poppenk, Kohler, & Mosco
vitch, 2010). Seven participants did not meet our inclusion criteria for
the final sample and were excluded from subsequent analyses [i.e., they
did not recognize at least 60% of famous faces/correctly reject at least
60% of non-famous faces (n = 2), or limited use (<5) of either the
Remember or Know responses (n = 5)]. Our final sample included 24
participants (years of age: M = 22.7, SD = 2.6; years of education: M =
15.8, SD = 1.2; nfemale = 19). Sample sizes for subsequent experiments
were chosen based on power analyses performed using effect sizes from
Experiment 1. All studies were approved by the Research Ethics Board at
the University of Toronto and informed consent was given by each
participant before participating.
Stimuli
Images were obtained from the Internet using Google image search
to create a pool of 400 stimuli. Two-hundred images were of famous
celebrities and 200 were of non-famous people. Both famous and nonfamous pools were balanced for sex, with 100 male and 100 female
images each. Faces were neutral to slightly positive in expression. Nonfamous faces were each manually matched for age, race, and other
distinctive features with a corresponding famous face to ensure no
overall differences across stimulus pools. Furthermore, images of nonfamous people were selected to be "famous-like", such that they were
often found on various modelling agency websites and their image
quality was comparable to those of the famous celebrities. The faces
were manually centered and cropped from the full image using an oval
frame in Adobe Photoshop and resized to 475x595 pixels. Images were
set to black and white and their luminance was matched using SHINE
toolbox (Willenbockel et al., 2010) and custom scripts in Matlab
(MathWorks, Natick, MA, USA). A scrambled version of each face was
also generated using custom scripts in Matlab (MathWorks, Natick, MA,
USA), such that each image was divided into 5-pixel clusters and then
randomly shuffled. These scrambled images were used for null trials.
An online pilot study was conducted to collect normative subjective
ratings on the stimuli. All 400 face stimuli were incorporated into a
survey via Qualtrics (Qualtrics, Provo, Utah, USA), and 7 separate rat
ings were collected for each face. The 7 rating tasks included in the
survey were as follows: 1) recognition and nameability, and 5-point
ratings of 2) fame, 3) facts known about the person pictured, 4) per
sonal memories associated with the person pictured, 5) emotionality, 6)
facial expression, and 7) attractiveness (for details, see Supplementary
Material: Section 1). The survey was administered in-lab and online
using Amazon's Mechanical Turk (Amazon, Seattle, WA, USA), and
included a total of 225 participants between the ages of 19 and 28.
Participants were all either in Canada or the USA when completing the
survey and gave their consent before participating. Each participant was
presented with a randomly selected subset of 100 faces, 50 famous and
50 non-famous, and was required to perform all seven ratings per face.
One catch trial per rating task was included instructing participants to
make a specific rating, serving as a quality-check to ensure all partici
pants were following instructions. Data from participants with an
incorrect catch trial in any of the seven rating tasks were excluded
entirely from all subsequent analyses. Ratings from 190 participants
survived this strict exclusion criterion, which amounted to ratings from
47 to 58 participants per face.
Only famous faces that were reliably recognized across participants
were included in the stimulus pool for the main recognition experi
ments. To isolate the most reliably recognized faces, recognition was
operationalized as: (% of participants who recognized a given face) - (%
of participants who did not recognize a given face). Positive values
indicate that the majority of participants recognized the face, while
negative values indicate that the majority of participants did not. The
final stimulus pool consisted of 128 faces that were the most recogniz
able (M = 68%, SD = 20%) and their age and race matched non-famous

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, we sought to replicate the relationship between
prior knowledge and memory for extrinsic context. To this end, we
presented participants with famous and non-famous faces in the context
of a recognition memory experiment using the Remember-Know para
digm (Tulving, 1985). Extrinsic context was operationalized as
Remember hits and objective source memory accuracy (i.e., memory for
the colour of a border presented around the face at study). We also
manipulated encoding duration (1 vs 4 s) for famous and non-famous
faces alike, allowing us to examine how prior knowledge influences
memory detail as compared to prolonged exposure.
Methods
Participants
Thirty-one young adults between 19 and 30 years of age participated
in the experiment. Participants were recruited from the University of
Toronto and surrounding areas and were compensated at a rate of $10/
hour with an average testing session lasting 2 h. Sample size was chosen
3

B. Bellana et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 121 (2021) 104264

counterparts (M = - 78%, SD = 12%) for a total of 256 faces. Both
famous and non-famous stimulus pools used for recognition were
balanced in terms of sex (nmale = 64, nfemale = 64, for both famous and
non-famous pools). Independent samples t-tests were used to compare
average ratings across the final famous and non-famous stimulus pools,
with Bonferroni adjusted p-values for multiple comparisons by multi
plying the uncorrected p-values by the total number of comparisons (i.e.,
6). The famous and non-famous faces were comparable in terms of
attractiveness (Mfamous = 2.8, Mnon-famous = 2.7; t(254) = 2.25, p > .1,
Cohen's d = .28), but robustly differed in terms of fame (Mfamous = 3.8,
Mnon-famous = 1.4; t(254) = 39.9, p < .0001, Cohen's d = 4.99), facts
known (Mfamous = 3.3, Mnon-famous = 1.3; t(254) = 44.69, p < .0001,
Cohen's d = 5.59), personal memories (Mfamous = 2.6, Mnon-famous = 1.2; t
(254) = 28.23, p < .0001, Cohen's d = 5.59), and emotionality (Mfamous
= 2.7, Mnon-famous = 1.7; t(254) = 36.71, p < .0001, Cohen's d = 3.53).
These robust differences were by design, as the measures with large
differences were on rating scales that tapped into aspects of prior
knowledge. Relative to prior knowledge, a modest difference was also
found in facial expression (Mfamous = 2.6, Mnon-famous = 2.3; t(254) =
3.85, p = .0009, Cohen's d = .48), suggesting the famous faces were
perceived to be slightly more expressive.

recognition in the absence of any recall of additional contextual infor
mation. The degree to which these two signals are separate remains
debated (Diana, Reder, Arndt, & Park, 2006; Moran & Goshen-Gottstein,
2015; Slotnick, 2010; Slotnick, Jeye, & Dodson, 2016; Wixted & Stretch,
2004; Yonelinas, 2002; Yonelinas, Aly, Wang, & Koen, 2010), however,
the Remember responses provide a useful subjective index of the extent
to which recognition is accompanied by the re-experiencing of source
details from the study episode.
In order to probe overall recognition memory performance, we
calculated d , or the standardized difference between the proportion of
accurately recognized old trials (hits) and the proportion of new trials
that were incorrectly recognized (false alarms; FA). Note that the new
trials in our experiment could be either famous or non-famous faces, and
thus our design crossed prior knowledge for both the studied and un
studied faces, allowing for an estimate of recognition accuracy that is
unbiased by prior knowledge. As a general note, we do not believe the
Remember response is a process-pure measure of recollection, but by
using a combination of the Remember-Know procedure and source
memory accuracy, we argue that we can accurately capture extra-item
source details in memory and thus can quantify the relationship be
tween prior knowledge and detailed memory formation.
The procedure in this particular paradigm consisted of 8 blocks, each
of which contained a study and recognition phase. Prior knowledge was
manipulated at the block level such that 4 of the blocks were entirely
composed of famous stimuli and the remaining 4 blocks, of non-famous
stimuli, in a fixed interleaved order which was counterbalanced across
participants. During each encoding phase, participants explicitly studied
a pseudorandom sequence of 24 face trials. Each trial began with a green
fixation cross presented for 500 ms, followed by a face stimulus pre
sented centrally on screen within a red- or blue-coloured rectangle. Half
of the face stimuli were presented for 1 s and half for 4 s to provide a
manipulation of encoding duration, followed by an inter-trial interval
ranging between 1500 and 2750 ms (M = ~2s). Participants were asked
to study each face in as much detail as possible as their memory would
be tested immediately after each study phase. No explicit response was
required during study. Participants were also instructed that each block
was independent from the others and contained unique face stimuli.
In addition to the target face trials, 12 additional null trials were also
interspersed during the study phase. Null trials consisted of a scrambled

Procedure
For a schematic overview of Experiment 1, see Fig. 1. Participants
made Remember-Know recognition judgements (Tulving, 1985) to a
total of 128 famous and 128 non-famous faces (96 targets, 32 foils each).
Participants select the "Remember" option (R) if their recognition is
accompanied by recall of contextual information (i.e., source memory)
from the study episode. "Know" (K) is selected if recognition is not
accompanied by any contextual information from study. The specific
instructions used for this experiment can be found in the Supplementary
Material: Section 2, as per the suggestions of Migo, Mayes, and Montaldi
(2012). Dual-process models conceptualize recognition as a composition
of two signals: recollection and familiarity (Mickes, Wais, & Wixted,
2009; Wixted & Stretch, 2004; see also Tulving, 1985). Recollection
reflects the likelihood that recognition is accompanied by additional
recall of idiosyncratic details from the encoding context. Familiarity
instead reflects an item-specific memory signal, contributing to

Fig. 1. A schematic example of one study-test block from Experiment 1. Immediate recognition in Experiment 2 was almost identical to the above depiction, except
thought probes were excluded. In this example, bold font indicates the correct response. For details, see Procedure.
4

B. Bellana et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 121 (2021) 104264

face stimulus from the experiment, 6 of which were presented for 1 s and
6 for 4 s. Null trials were not to be encoded and were used to make the
paradigm comparable to a separate experiment conducted with func
tional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). These trials were not rele
vant to the behavioural paradigm and will not be discussed further.
The first recognition trial was presented 20 s after the termination of
the last study trial. During each recognition phase, participants were
presented with a pseudorandom sequence of 32 faces. 24 of the faces
were from the previous study list and 8 were novel foils (i.e., old/new
ratio of 75/25). Again, each trial began with a green fixation cross
presented for 500 ms, followed by the face stimulus presented centrally
onscreen within a grey-coloured rectangle. Each face was presented for
2.5 s during which time participants were required to make a Remember
(R), Know (K), or New (N) response using the keyboard. Participants
used both hands to make responses; the index and middle finger of one
hand were used to respond R or K and the index finger of the other to
respond N. The mapping of hand to response option was counter
balanced across participants. Note that participants were given the la
bels "re-experienced" and "familiar" in lieu of Remember and Know
across all experiments (see Fig. 1). This was done to more clearly map
the subjective experience of each response to their label, which we have
anecdotally found to improve our participants ability to comprehend
this meta-cognitive distinction. If the participant indicated the image
was from the previous study list (i.e., R or K), it immediately prompted
the completion of two additional self-paced memory judgements. The
first was a source memory judgement in which participants indicated the
colour of the rectangular border presented with the face during study
from the onscreen options: "Red", "Blue", or "Don't Know". Source
memory provided a crucial objective estimate to accompany our sub
jective Remember responses by testing whether a specific dimension of
contextual information from the study episode (i.e., border colour)
accompanied recognition. The second was a subjective thought-probe
that sought to provide supplementary insight into the kinds of
thoughts that accompanied recognition. A detailed description of the
thought probes and their results can be found in Supplementary Mate
rial: Section 3-4. Note: both source memory and thought probes only
followed trials in which the participant indicated the face was indeed
studied. If a participant pressed "New" in response to a face, it imme
diately prompted the next recognition memory trial.
In addition to the studied target and novel foil recognition trials, 12
additional null scramble trials were also interspersed during the recog
nition phase. Participants were asked to press the new response key for
these trials; null trials were not relevant to the behavioural paradigm
and will not be discussed further.
After the 8 blocks of the task were completed, participants were
briefly interviewed for ~5 min regarding their memory strategies.
Lastly, participants were asked to perform a series of post-test fame
ratings on the stimuli from the completed experiment. All 256 faces from
the previous 8 blocks of the experiment (i.e., both studied targets and
novel foils) were used for this rating task. Trials were self-paced and
participants responded with the index fingers of each hand using the
buttons Q or P on the keyboard with response mapping counterbalanced
across participants. Each trial began with a 500 ms green fixation cross,
followed by the presentation of a face in the centre of the screen. Par
ticipants were first required to indicate whether they believed the face
was of a famous or non-famous individual, based on their personal
experience. For faces judged as famous, participants were then required
to indicate whether or not they could name the famous individual. On
average, participants correctly classified 89% (SD = 12%) of the famous
faces and 93% (SD = 10%) of the non-famous faces. These data suggest
that the famous faces used in this experiment were highly recognizable,
consistent with online norming. Final analyses were restricted to only
include faces that were correctly recognized as either famous or nonfamous in the post-test.
Participants were provided with detailed instructions regarding the
experimental procedure before beginning the task to ensure optimal

comprehension and compliance. Experimenters provided a detailed
scripted explanation of the task procedure, definitions of "Remember"
and "Know", and also a description of the thought-probe labels (see
Supplementary Material: Section 2). Participants were required to pro
vide the experimenter with an adequate explanation of the R-K
distinction and the thought-probe categories, in their own words, before
they were permitted to continue. Participants also performed a practice
run of the experiment, which consisted of studying a reduced list of 12
non-famous faces, half of which were presented for 1 s and half for 4 s.
Recognition trials consisted of 16 faces, 12 from the study list and 4
novel foils. Participants were given feedback for recognition and source
memory during the practice phase. No faces from the practice run were
included in the final experiment.
Analyses
All statistical analyses were conducted using R (R Core Team, 2020).
Repeated measures ANOVAs were implemented using the ez package
(Lawrence, 2016). Effect sizes were reported using generalized 2 or
Cohen's d where appropriate.
Results
All data are publicly available on the Open Science Framework (htt
ps://osf.io/fqrhj/).
Prior knowledge improves overall recognition
Overall recognition accuracy was operationalized using d , or the
standardized proportion of accurately recognized studied targets minus
the standardized proportion of false alarms to novel foils (i.e., z(hits) - z
(false alarms)), per participant. This characterized discriminability in
overall recognition while collapsing over subjective distinctions in
recognition quality (i.e., Remember or Know). The effect of prior
knowledge and encoding duration on recognition d was measured using
a 2 (prior knowledge: famous, non-famous) x 2 (encoding duration: 1 s,
4 s) repeated-measures ANOVA (see Fig. 2A). Significant main effects of
prior knowledge [F(1,23) = 39.78, p < 0.0001, 2G(Generalized) = .25] and
encoding duration [F(1,23) = 30.02, p < 0.0001, 2G = .018] were
observed. Presence of prior knowledge and a longer encoding opportu
nity during study both improved subsequent recognition accuracy, but
prior knowledge produced the larger accuracy benefit. The interaction
between prior knowledge and encoding duration was not statistically
significant [F < 1].
Prior knowledge facilitates recognition via Remember hits
To determine whether the benefit in overall recognition was driven
by a subjective measure of extrinsic context (i.e., Remember responses),
we examined Remember and Know response rates for old (i.e., hits) and
new trials (i.e., false alarms) separately. First, hit rates were examined
using a 2 (prior knowledge: famous, non-famous) x 2 (encoding dura
tion: 1 s, 4 s) x 2 (response type: Remember, Know) repeated-measures
ANOVA (see Fig. 2B). Interactions between prior knowledge and
encoding duration [F(1,23) = 5.05, p = 0.034, 2G = .001], prior
knowledge and response type [F(1,23) = 7.41, p = 0.012, 2G = .067],
and encoding duration and response type [F(1,23) = 13.54, p = 0.0012,
2G = .005] reached significance. Interactions were unpacked using
paired t-tests. The interaction between prior knowledge and encoding
duration was driven by a larger effect of fame in the 1 s [t(23) = 7.6, p <
.0001, Cohen's d = 0.71] as compared to the 4 s condition [t(23) = 5.5, p
< .0001, Cohen's d = 0.58] when averaging across Remember and Know
trials. The interaction between prior knowledge and response type
revealed that the effect of prior knowledge on recognition accuracy was
driven by Remember [t(23) = 3.98, p = .0006, Cohen's d = 0.50] as
opposed to Know trials [t(23) = - 1.06, p = .30, Cohen's d = - 0.13].
5

B. Bellana et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 121 (2021) 104264

Fig. 2. Results from Experiment 1: Prior knowl
edge benefits overall recognition and memory for
extrinsic context, more so than extended study
opportunity. Memory for extra item detail was
operationalized using subjective (Remember) and
objective source memory accuracy. (A) Effect of
prior knowledge (i.e., famous, non-famous) and
encoding duration (1 s, 4 s) on overall recogni
tion accuracy [i.e., d = z(hits) - z(false alarms)].
(B) Overall recognition expressed as proportion
of hits and false alarms for Remember and Know
responses, separately. Better recognition for
famous faces is driven by a boost in Remember
hits. (C) Effect of prior knowledge a encoding
duration on source memory accuracy [i.e., d = z
(source hits) - z(source false alarms)]. (D) Source
memory accuracy broken down into hits (accu
rate source), false alarms (source misattribution),
and misses (forgotten source). Proportion in the
case of source memory is based on the total of
trials with correct item recognition only. Error
bars represent standard error of the mean.

0.0001, 2G = .059]. Paired t-tests highlight that prior knowledge was
associated with an increase in source hits [t(23) = 4.54, p = 0.0002,
Cohen's d = 0.41], no effect on source false alarms [t(23) = 1.33, p =
0.20, Cohen's d = 0.03], and a reduction in source misses [t(23) = - 4.41,
p = 0.0002, Cohen's d = - 0.19]. Overall, prior knowledge appears to
boost source memory accuracy via hits as opposed to false alarms, in
addition to a reduction in source forgetting.

Finally, the interaction between encoding duration and response type
revealed that encoding duration also modestly benefitted Remember [t
(23) = 5.26, p < .0001, Cohen's d = .04] as opposed to Know trials [t(23)
= - 0.27, p = .79, Cohen's d = - 0.002].
False alarm rates were also examined using a 2 (prior knowledge:
famous, non-famous) x 2 (response type: Remember, Know) repeatedmeasures ANOVA (see Fig. 2B). There was a marginal main effect of
prior knowledge [F(1,23) = 3.28, p = 0.083, 2G = .015], as famous faces
were associated with fewer false alarms. All other effects failed to reach
significance [F < 1]. Overall, the benefit of prior knowledge on recog
nition appeared to be driven by a boost in Remember hits, consistent
with the idea that prior knowledge supports the encoding of extrinsic
context.

Interim summary
Experiment 1 replicates previous work indicating that prior knowl
edge benefits item recognition (Backman, 1991; Bird et al., 2011;
Klatzky & Forrest, 1984; Yarmey, 1971). Consistent with the resource
hypothesis, we also found clear evidence that recognition is accompa
nied by better memory for extra item details, operationalized as
Remember hits and objective source memory (Brandt et al., 2005;
DeWitt et al., 2012; Horry et al., 2010; Long et al., 2008; Long & Prat,
2002; Reder et al., 2013). Longer encoding duration (4 vs 1 s) benefitted
item recognition and Remember hits as well, though to a lesser degree
than prior knowledge. Interestingly, encoding duration did not appear to
benefit objective source memory accuracy, suggesting that preexperimental familiarity is a more robust determinant of extrinsic
context in memory as compared to study opportunity. This discrepancy
between prior knowledge and encoding duration on extrinsic context is
reminiscent of the effect of deep processing on recollection. Attending to
the semantic meaning associated with a stimulus is more likely to pro
duce recollection, as measured by Remember responses or objective
source memory, as compared to attending to its surface-level perceptual
features (Bower & Karlin, 1974; Craik, 2002; Craik & Lockhart, 1972;
Yonelinas, 2002). Together, these results highlight the importance of
semantic associations during encoding. When prior knowledge is
available, the study episode can be readily parsed into meaningful
chunks, leaving more resources available to encode extra-item details.
However, when a stimulus is unfamiliar, chunking is more difficult (e.g.,
DeWitt et al., 2012; Diana & Reder, 2006; Reder et al., 2013) and longer
study opportunity alone may be unable to compensate for the height
ened demands on encoding resources.

Prior knowledge boosts source memory hits
We next examined an objective estimate of extrinsic context: the
likelihood a participant could successfully recall the colour of the border
surrounding the face at study. Subject-specific estimates of source
memory were submitted to a 2 (prior knowledge: famous, non-famous)
x 2 (encoding duration: 1 s, 4 s) repeated-measures ANOVA. First,
source memory accuracy was calculated using d , or the standardized
proportion of accurately recognized trials in which border colour was
correctly recalled minus the standardized proportion of accurately
recognized trials in which border colour was incorrectly recalled (i.e., z
(source hits) - z(source false alarms)). Note that chance was not 50% for
these trials, as participants had 3 response options: "Red", "Blue" or
"Don't Know", and were instructed to choose "Don't Know" if they were
not sure. All "Don't Know" trials were considered misses and thus do not
contribute to this analysis. A significant main effect of prior knowledge
was observed [F(1,23) = 8.47, p = 0.008, 2G = .064], as recognition of
famous faces was more likely to accompany accurate source memory for
the border colour from study, consistent with the boost in subjective
Remember responses (Fig. 2). No main effect or interaction with
encoding duration was observed [F < 1].
For a more detailed sense of how prior knowledge affects memory for
extrinsic context, source memory response rates were submitted to a 2
(prior knowledge: famous, non-famous) x 3 (response type: hit, false
alarm, miss) repeated measures ANOVA. Note: a source false alarm is
when a participant indicates the border colour is blue when it was red, or
vice versa, while a miss is when participants fail to recall the border
colour and select "Don't Know". A significant interaction between prior
knowledge and response type was observed [F(1,23) = 18.54, p <

Experiment 2
In Experiment 2, we sought to extend the previous results in two
ways. First, if prior knowledge leaves more resources available to encode
additional details from a study episode (Experiment 1), then it would
6

B. Bellana et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 121 (2021) 104264

follow that the amount of prior knowledge associated with a given
stimulus should predict the likelihood of encoding additional extrinsic
contextual details into memory. To this end, we collected subjective
ratings of the degree of prior knowledge participants had, per stimulus,
on a 5-point scale. With this measure, we were directly able to test our
hypothesis that the degree of prior knowledge associated with a stimulus
should predict the likelihood of recalling extrinsic context.
Second, we also sought to determine whether prior knowledge
facilitated the formation of durable memories, persisting beyond im
mediate recognition. In the current paradigm, participants were exposed
to 8 separate study-test blocks during which they learned 24 faces each,
over the span of an hour, amounting to a total of 256 faces when
including both targets and novel foils. If prior knowledge allows for
better encoding, it follows that memory for the target itself may also
prove durable and able to persist beyond immediate recognition. Neural
evidence in line with this hypothesis suggests that prior knowledge fa
cilitates neocortical learning and consolidation (McClelland, 2013;
Sharon et al., 2011; Tse et al., 2007) affording the rapid formation of
durable memories (for discussion, see Antony et al., 2017; Gilboa &
Marlatte, 2017).
To explore these possibilities, we included a surprise delayed
recognition test, in which all 256 faces (128 famous, 128 non-famous)
from the previous 8 study-test blocks were presented alongside a small
subset of entirely novel foils (16 famous, 16 non-famous). Included in
the 256 target faces were both faces presented at study and faces pre
sented as foils during immediate recognition, allowing us to measure
delayed recognition performance of famous and non-famous faces under
both intentional (viz. studied targets from immediate test) and inci
dental (viz. correctly rejected foils from immediate test) encoding
conditions.

facial expression (Mfamous = 2.5, Mnon-famous = 2.3; t(30) < 1), but
robustly different in terms of fame (Mfamous = 2.9, Mnon-famous = 1.4; t
(30) = 18.40, p < 0.0001, Cohen's d = 6.5), facts known (Mfamous = 2.8,
Mnon-famous = 1.3; t(30) = 15.46, p < 0.0001, Cohen's d = 5.5), personal
memories (Mfamous = 2.2, Mnon-famous = 1.2; t(30) = 15.46, p < 0.0001,
Cohen's d = 5.5), and emotionality (Mfamous = 2.4, Mnon-famous = 1.7; t
(30) = 12.65, p < 0.0001, Cohen's d = 4.5).
Procedure
Participants made Remember-Know judgements on 128 famous and
128 non-famous faces (96 targets, 32 foils each) in a nearly identical
procedure to Experiment 1. The differences between the two paradigms
will be highlighted below. For both encoding and retrieval phases within
each of the 8 blocks, Experiment 2 used fully randomized trial orders as
opposed to the pseudorandom sequences used in Experiment 1. This
randomization removed any possibility that participants were able to
notice potential structure in the trial order. Also, Experiment 2 manip
ulated prior knowledge using either a mixed (i.e., famous and nonfamous stimuli presented in each block) or blocked design (i.e.,
famous and non-famous stimuli presented in separate blocks), across
participants. Like Experiment 1, participants encoded a sequence of 24
faces in each block, but in the mixed design 12 of these faces were
famous and 12 were non-famous. In addition, we included the encoding
duration manipulation, such that 6 of the famous and non-famous faces
were studied for 1 s and 6 for 4 s. Similarly, the recognition phase again
consisted of 32 faces in each block. 24 of the faces were from the pre
vious study list and 8 were novel foils (i.e., old/new ratio of 75/25), in
which half of the faces from both categories were famous or non-famous.
The blocked design in Experiment 2 was identical to that of Experiment
1, except for the use of a fully randomized trial order. During recogni
tion, each face was presented for 2.5 s during which time they were
required to make a remember (R), know (K), or new (N) response using
the left, down or right computer keys. If the participant indicated the
image was from the previous study list (i.e., R or K), they were required
to complete one additional memory judgement testing source memory.
The source memory judgement required participants to indicate the
colour of the rectangular border presented with the face during study
from the onscreen options: "Red", "Blue", or "Don't Know". Thought
probes were not included in Experiment 2 to simplify the procedure.
After the 8 study-test blocks of task were completed, participants
were briefly interviewed for ~5 min regarding their memory strategies.
Afterwards, participants were given a surprise delayed recognition
memory test. All 256 faces from the previous 8 blocks of the experiment
(i.e., both studied targets and novel foils) in addition to 32 entirely novel
unstudied faces (16 famous and 16 non-famous) were included in a fully
randomized order for the delayed test. Trials were self-paced, and par
ticipants responded with the index finger of both hands using the but
tons Q or P on the keyboard with response mapping counterbalanced
across participants. Each trial began with a 500 ms green fixation cross,
followed by the presentation of a face in the centre of the screen. Par
ticipants were first required to indicate whether the face was old (i.e., a
target or foil previously seen in the experiment) or new (i.e., entirely
novel, not seen in the experiment). Next, participants were asked to
indicate whether they believed the face was of a famous or non-famous
individual, based on their personal experience. For faces judged as
famous, participants were then required to indicate how much they
knew about the individual on a scale of 1 (very little) to 5 (a lot) using
the number pad on the keyboard. Participants then indicated whether or
not they could name the famous individual. On average, participants
recognized 88% (SD = 10%) of famous faces while failing to recognize
91% (SD = 10%) of the non-famous faces. Accurately recognized famous
faces were associated with an average prior knowledge rating of 3.19
(SD = 0.66) across all participants. Famous faces used in this experiment
were highly recognizable, again consistent with online norming and
Experiment 1. Final analyses were restricted to only include faces that

Methods
Participants
GPower v. 3.1 (Faul, Erdfelder, Lang, & Buchner, 2007) was used to
conduct a power analysis based on the main effect of prior knowledge on
Remember hits in Experiment 1 (2G = .14). The results of the power
analysis indicated that a sample size of 19 would be required for find a
significant effect with alpha = 0.05 and power = 0.9. To maintain a
comparable sample size to Experiment 1, we aimed for a sample size of
48 participants, with 24 participants in each of the mixed and blocked
conditions (see Procedure). Fifty-six young adults between 19 and 30
years of age participated in the experiment. Participants were recruited
from the University of Toronto and surrounding areas and were
compensated $10/hour. An average testing session lasted 2 h. Eight
participants did not meet our inclusion criteria for the final sample and
were excluded from subsequent analyses [i.e., did not recognize at least
60% of famous faces/correctly reject 60% of non-famous faces (n = 7),
or limited use (<5) of the Remember or Know responses (n = 1)]. Our
final sample consisted of 48 participants (years of age: M = 22.1, SD =
2.1; years of education: M = 15.7, SD = 1.6; nfemale = 41).
Stimuli
Two-hundred and fifty-six faces (128 famous, 128 non-famous) from
the final stimulus pool in Experiment 1 were used again in Experiment 2
(for details, see Methods for Experiment 1). 32 additional novel faces (16
famous, 16 non-famous; both balanced for sex: nfemales = 8), from the
overall 400 face stimulus pool, were included as novel foils in a surprise
delayed recognition test, unique to Experiment 2. Based on the norma
tive ratings collected online in our pilot study, the additional famous
faces were more recognizable (M = 45%, SD = 7%) than the non-famous
faces (M = - 76%, SD = 12%), as expected. Also, the additional famous
and non-famous faces were comparable in terms of average normative
ratings of attractiveness (Mfamous = 2.8, Mnon-famous = 2.8; t(30) < 1) and
7

B. Bellana et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 121 (2021) 104264

were correctly recognized as either famous or non-famous in the posttest.

Prior knowledge facilitates recognition via Remember hits
Overall recognition was unpacked into Remember and Know
response rates for hits and false alarms separately. First, hit rates were
examined using a 2 (prior knowledge: famous, non-famous) x 2
(encoding duration: 1 s, 4 s) x 2 (response type: Remember, Know) x 2
(design: mixed, blocked) mixed factorial ANOVA, where design was
included as a between-subjects factor (see Fig. 3B). A three-way inter
action between prior knowledge and encoding duration and response
type was observed [F(1,46) = 5.86, p = 0.019, 2G = .003]. Simple effects
were conducted by examining Remember and Know hits separately. For
Remember hits, a significant interaction was observed between prior
knowledge and encoding duration [F(1,46) = 9.28, p = 0.0038, 2G =
.005], driven by a larger benefit of prior knowledge for 1 s [t(47) =
10.77, p < 0.0001, Cohen's d = 1.03] as opposed to 4 s encoding [t(47) =
8.48, p < 0.0001, Cohen's d = 0.86]. For Know hits, significant main
effects of prior knowledge [F(1,46) = 42.11, p < 0.0001, 2G = .169] and
encoding duration were observed [F(1,46) = 22.69, p < 0.0001, 2G =
.012] with no interaction. Unlike Remember hits, Know hits were more
frequent for non-famous faces and for 1 s encoding. Note that this
opposing pattern is reasonable considering Remember and Know are not
independent: more Remember responses implies fewer Know responses.
Finally, false alarm rates were submitted to a 2 (prior knowledge:
famous, non-famous) x 2 (response type: Remember, Know) x 2
(design: mixed, blocked) mixed factorial ANOVA (see Fig. 3B). A sig
nificant interaction was observed between prior knowledge and
response type [F(1,46) = 18.26, p < 0.0001, 2G = .027], driven by fewer
false alarms for famous Know trials [t(47) = - 4.06, p = 0.00019,
Cohen's d = - 0.34], with no difference in Remember trials [t(47) = 0.39,
p = 0.70, Cohen's d = 0.04].

Analyses
All statistical analyses were conducted using R (R Core Team 2020).
For this experiment and all subsequent experiments, repeated measures
ANOVAs were implemented using the ez package (Lawrence, 2016) and
mixed effect logistic regressions were implemented using glmer from the
lme4 package (Bates, Machler, Bolker, & Walker, 2015). Effect sizes
were reported using generalized 2 or Cohen's d where appropriate.
Results
Analyses from Experiment 1 were replicated in Experiment 2. The
results are consistent across both experiments, indicating a reliable
benefit of prior knowledge and encoding duration on overall recognition
accuracy. Extrinsic context operationalized via Remember hits and
objective source memory accuracy, was again better recalled for famous
faces. Improved source memory accuracy for famous faces was again
largely driven by a boost in source hits. The details of these analyses are
reported below.
Prior knowledge improves overall recognition
The effect of prior knowledge and encoding duration on recognition
d was measured using a 2 (prior knowledge: famous, non-famous) x 2
(encoding duration: 1 s, 4 s) x 2 (design: mixed, blocked) mixed
factorial ANOVA, where design was included as a between-subjects
factor (see Fig. 3A). Significant main effects of prior knowledge [F
(1,46) = 88.37, p < 0.0001, 2G = .226] and encoding duration [F(1,46)
= 32.18, p < 0.0001, 2G = .009] were observed. The presence of prior
knowledge and a longer encoding opportunity during study both
improved subsequent recognition accuracy, but again, prior knowledge
produced the larger accuracy benefit. The only other effect to reach
significance was an interaction between design and encoding duration
[F(1,46) = 5.30, p = 0.03, 2G = .001], which was driven by a larger
benefit of longer encoding durations in the blocked [t(23) = 6.06, p <
0.0001, Cohen's d = 0.06] as compared to mixed design [t(23) = 2.24, p
= 0.035, Cohen's d = 0.02].

Prior knowledge boosts source memory hits
Next, objective source memory accuracy from all accurately recog
nized trials were submitted to a 2 (prior knowledge: famous, nonfamous) x 2 (encoding duration: 1 s, 4 s) x 2 (design: mixed, blocked)
mixed factorial ANOVA (see Fig. 3D). A significant main effect of prior
knowledge [F(1,46) = 70.02, p < 0.0001, 2G = .185] was observed.
Encoding duration had a marginal impact on source memory but was not
statistically significant [F(1,46) = 3.13, p = 0.083, 2G = 0.005]. No other
effects were statistically significant (F < 1). Although Experiment 2 re
veals a marginal improvement in source memory accompanying a longer

Fig. 3. Results from Experiment 2: Replica
tion of the prior knowledge benefit on over
all recognition and memory for extrinsic
context. (A) Effect of prior knowledge (i.e.,
famous, non-famous) and encoding duration
(1 s, 4 s) on overall recognition accuracy [i.
e., d = z(hits) - z(false alarms)]. (B) Overall
recognition unpacked into proportion of hits
and false alarms for Remember and Know
responses, separately. Better recognition for
famous faces is driven by a boost in
Remember hits. (C) Results of mixed effects
logistic regression predicting the likelihood
of a Remember hit for famous faces based on
degree of prior knowledge. Grey envelope
represents 95% confidence intervals esti
mated around the regression parameter using
500 bootstraps. Black histogram reflects the
distribution of prior knowledge ratings for all Remember hit trials. Grey histogram reflects prior knowledge ratings for all other trials. Dashed lines represent the
mean of each distribution, respectively. (D) Effect of prior knowledge and encoding duration on source memory accuracy [i.e., d = z(source hits) - z(source false
alarms)]. (E) Source memory accuracy unpacked into hits (accurate source), false alarms (source misattribution), and misses (forgotten source). Proportion in the
case of source memory is based on the total of trials with correct item recognition only. (F) Results of mixed effects model predicting the likelihood of a source
memory hit based on degree of prior knowledge. Histograms, medians and confidence intervals were derived identically to Fig. 3C, except using source hits vs. other
source trials (i.e., false alarms, misses). Error bars for all bar plots represent standard error of the mean.
8

B. Bellana et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 121 (2021) 104264

study opportunity, prior knowledge again produced the more robust
benefit to source memory accuracy, thus replicating Experiment 1.
To unpack overall source accuracy, source memory response rates
were submitted to a 2 (prior knowledge: famous, non-famous) x 3
(response type: hit, false alarm, miss) x 2 (design: mixed, blocked)
mixed factorial ANOVA (see Fig. 3E). A significant 3-way interaction
between prior knowledge and response type and design was observed [F
(2,92) = 5.56, p = 0.0053, 2G = .012]. To unpack this interaction, mixed
and blocked designs were analyzed separately. For the mixed design, the
interaction between prior knowledge and response type persisted [F
(2,46) = 50.70, p < 0.0001, 2G = .199]. Prior knowledge was associated
with more source hits [t(23) = 9.38, p < 0.0001, Cohen's d = 0.48], no
effect on source false alarms [t(23) = - 0.30, p = 0.76, Cohen's d =
- 0.04], and a reduction in source misses [t(23) = - 6.91, p < 0.0001,
Cohen's d = - 0.39]. For the blocked design, a significant interaction
between prior knowledge and response type was again observed [F
(2,46) = 24.19, p < 0.0001, 2G = .095]. Prior knowledge was again
associated with more source hits [t(23) = 6,18, p < 0.0001, Cohen's d =
0.48], a significant reduction in source false alarms [t(23) = - 2.83, p =
0.009, Cohen's d = - 0.37], and a reduction in source misses [t(23) =
- 4.41, p = 0.0002, Cohen's d = - 0.16].

delayed recognition memory analyses. This ensured that any bias from
immediate recognition would not persist into the delayed recognition
results. The lasting effects of prior knowledge and encoding duration on
delayed recognition accuracy were measured using a 2 (prior knowl
edge: famous, non-famous) x 2 (encoding duration: 1 s, 4 s) x 2 (design:
mixed, blocked) mixed factorial ANOVA (see Fig. 4). A significant main
effect of prior knowledge [F(1,46) = 104.43, p < 0.0001, 2G = .276] was
observed, as famous faces were better recognized in the surprise delayed
test. A marginal effect of encoding duration was observed [F(1,46) =
3.31, p = 0.08, 2G = .001], however no other effects were significant (all
Fs < 1.3). Overall, these data demonstrate that prior knowledge
benefitted the formation of durable memories over and beyond any ef
fect of encoding duration.
As all correctly recognized targets and foils from immediate recog
nition were defined as targets during the delayed recognition memory
test, we were able to additionally test delayed recognition for both
accurately recognized targets and correctly rejected foils from immedi
ate recognition. Foils from immediate recognition were not explicitly
studied, and thus delayed recognition of these faces provides a measure
of the effect of prior knowledge on incidental encoding. Note that a
given face stimulus may have been an intentionally encoded target for
one participant or an incidentally encoded foil for another, thus making
it unlikely that stimulus selection effects can explain any potential dif
ferences of encoding type. Also, encoding duration was not included in
this model as the incidentally encoded faces were not presented during
the study period. The effects of prior knowledge and encoding type on
delayed recognition accuracy were measured using a 2 (prior knowl
edge: famous, non-famous) x 2 (encoding type: intentional, incidental)
x 2 (design: mixed, blocked) mixed factorial ANOVA. Significant main
effects of prior knowledge [F(1,46) = 95.30, p < 0.0001, 2G = .318] and
encoding type [F(1,46) = 230.19, p < 0.0001, 2G = .150] were observed.
As expected, intentional encoding benefitted delayed recognition
memory accuracy as compared to incidental encoding (see Fig. 4).
Interestingly, prior knowledge enhanced delayed recognition for both
intentional and incidental encoding conditions, highlighting the benefit
of prior knowledge on the formation of durable memories even in the
absence of explicit encoding instructions.

A graded effect of prior knowledge on memory for extrinsic context
The presence of prior knowledge at encoding was associated with
better memory for extrinsic context from the study episode, both in
terms of the Remember hits and source memory accuracy. If prior
knowledge indeed affords more available attentional resources at
encoding, then it would follow that the degree of prior knowledge
associated with a specific stimulus should predict memory for extrinsic
context from the study episode. To this end, we conducted a multilevel
logistic regression model to test whether a dichotomous measures of
extra-item detail per studied trial, defined separately using Remember
or source memory accuracy, could be predicted by the degree of prior
knowledge reported for a given famous face (see Fig. 3C, F). When using
Remember responses, a studied trial was considered accurate only if it
received a Remember response. All other studied trials received a 0.
When using source memory, a studied trial was accurate only if a
participant correctly recalled the border colour from study. All other
studied trials received a 0. Degree of prior knowledge associated with a
given stimulus was operationalized as its subjective 1 (low) - 5 (high)
rating of fame, and z-scored within participant. Only famous face trials
that were accurately recognized, both at immediate test and in the posttest fame judgement, were entered into this model, thus isolating degree
of prior knowledge. Subject and face stimulus were treated as random
effects. Ninety-five percent confidence intervals were then generated
around our model estimates via a bootstrapping procedure (sampling
with replacement, 500 repetitions).
For Remember accuracy, a Wald test demonstrated that degree of
prior knowledge was indeed predictive of Remember accuracy (X2(1) =
214.83,  = 0.44,  95% CI = [0.39, 0.50], p < .0001). This positive
relationship between prior knowledge and Remember hits extended to
objective source memory accuracy (X2(1) = 145.68,  = 0.38,  95% CI
= [0.32, 0.44], p < .0001), further confirming a positive relationship
between the availability of prior knowledge and memory for extrinsic
context.

Interim summary
Experiment 2 replicated and extended the results of Experiment 1,
demonstrating that a participant's degree of prior knowledge for a given
stimulus was indeed predictive of memory for extrinsic context, oper
ationalized as Remember hits and source memory accuracy. This graded
relationship between prior knowledge and memory detail is consistent
with resource-based models, as the amount of attentional resources
expended on encoding should be directly related to how easily a given
stimulus can be parsed into a meaningful chunk (e.g., Popov & Reder,

Prior knowledge facilitates the intentional and incidental formation of
durable memories
To characterize any lasting effects of prior knowledge on recognition
memory, we analyzed performance on a surprise delayed recognition
memory test presented after the completion of the 8 study-test blocks.
First, delayed recognition for intentionally studied targets was exam
ined. Delayed recognition accuracy was defined as d . Only trials that
were accurately recognized at immediate recognition contributed to

Fig. 4. Delayed recognition from Experiment 2: Prior knowledge benefited
recognition accuracy for a surprise delayed recognition test for all 256 faces
from the experiment. Famous faces were better remembered whether they were
studied targets (Intentional) or correctly rejected foils during the immediate
test, highlighting the efficiency of the process when prior knowledge is avail
able. Longer encoding duration failed to produce a comparable benefit.
9

B. Bellana et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 121 (2021) 104264

2020). In Experiment 2, longer encoding duration was also associated
with an increase in both Remember and source hits, although to a lesser
extent than prior knowledge, again emphasizing the importance of se
mantic associations during encoding.
Furthermore, performance on a surprise delayed recognition mem
ory test was greater for faces with prior knowledge, while encoding
duration had no discernable impact. The benefit of prior knowledge on
delayed recognition was observed for intentionally (viz., studied targets
from immediate test) and incidentally studied faces alike (viz., correctly
rejected foils from immediate test), consistent with the idea that stimuli
associated with prior knowledge are more easily encoded. Similar re
sults have been reported using depth of processing manipulations with
word stimuli, such that participants performed better on a surprise
recognition test when they were oriented towards a words semantic
meaning during study (e.g., does this word fit in this sentence?) as
compared to its surface level features (e.g., is this word printed in capital
letters?) (Craik & Tulving, 1975). Again, the lack of benefit of encoding
duration on delayed recognition highlights the importance attending to
semantic associations, above extended exposure alone, on the formation
of lasting memories.
In addition to the overall replication, we observed subtle differences
in the extent to which prior knowledge affected memory for extrinsic
context depending on whether the study and test contained both famous
and non-famous (mixed) or either famous or non-famous faces
(blocked). Famous faces were associated with fewer source false alarms
and less source forgetting in the blocked as compared to the mixed
design, indicating that the benefit of prior knowledge on memory for
extra-item detail is better in blocked as compared to mixed designs. This
interpretation is consistent with resource-based accounts, as unfamiliar
stimuli may benefit from the attentional resources made available from
the efficient encoding of neighbouring familiar stimuli (for related dis
cussion, see Popov & Reder, 2020).
In Experiment 1 and 2, we used famous faces to demonstrate a clear
and robust effect of prior knowledge on memory for extrinsic context.
Though famous faces are an effective way to evoke prior knowledge, we
cannot exclude the possibility that the effects reported above may be
restricted to face stimuli. To examine this possibility, we ran an addi
tional experiment in which the memoranda were replaced with images
of common and uncommon brands of food and beverages.

in the experiment. Participants were recruited from the University of
Toronto and surrounding areas and were compensated $10/hour. An
average testing session lasted 2 h. Seven participants did not meet our
inclusion criteria for the final sample and were excluded from subse
quent analyses [i.e., did not recognize at least 70% of common or
correctly reject at least 70% of uncommon food and beverage stimuli (n
= 5), or issues with the experiment software (n = 2)]. Our final sample
consisted of 48 participants (years of age: M = 22.3, SD = 3.5; years of
education: M = 15.4, SD = 2.0; nfemale = 35), identical to that used in
Experiment 2.
Stimuli
Images were obtained from the Internet using Google image search,
amounting to a total pool of 400 images. Two-hundred images were of
common North American foods/beverages and 200 were of uncommon
international foods/beverages. All images were selected to have prom
inent and recognizable logos, while ensuring all lettering was restricted
to alphabets based in Latin script. Both common and uncommon pools
were matched for the number of stimuli of a specific type (e.g., chocolate
bars, chips, candies, carbonated beverages, etc.) to ensure they had
comparable compositions. The images had their backgrounds removed
and were manually centered and resized to fit within a 475x595 pixel
frame. Unlike faces, images remained in original colour to facilitate their
identification and association with prior experience. An in-lab pilot
study was conducted to collect normative subjective ratings on our
stimuli. Nine raters were presented with a list of all brand names for the
400 food and beverage stimuli and were asked to provide a rating on a 3point scale regarding their personal familiarity with each item. The scale
ranged from 0 (no knowledge of this item) to 2 (considerable knowledge
of this item). No images were provided, and ratings were provided based
entirely on brand names only. Stimuli were then manually selected to
create two stimulus pools that were either highly familiar (i.e., common)
or highly unfamiliar (i.e., uncommon) to our raters, while again
ensuring that the two pools were matched in terms of their composition
(e.g., chocolate bars, chips, candies, carbonated beverages, etc.).
Two-hundred and fifty-six food and beverage items (128 common,
128 uncommon) formed the final stimulus pool for Experiment 3. Im
ages of 32 additional novel foods and beverages (16 common, 16 un
common), from the overall 400 item stimulus pool, were included as
novel foils in a surprise delayed recognition test, as described in
Experiment 2.

Experiment 3
In Experiment 3, we replicate our previous design using common and
uncommon brands of foods and beverages instead of famous and nonfamous faces. Akin to famous faces, some foods and beverages are
highly prevalent in a North American context, and thus should be
associated with more prior knowledge in North American participants as
compared to their unfamiliar, international counterparts. Broadly, we
hypothesized that prior knowledge may operate in a domain general
manner, predicting memory for extrinsic context similarly for food items
as we previously demonstrated with faces. We also expect the benefit of
prior knowledge on extrinsic context to exceed any benefit of encoding
duration. It is important to note that our food and beverage stimuli were
necessarily more heterogeneous than faces as they were drawn from
numerous identifiable categories (e.g., chocolate bars, chips, candies,
carbonated beverages, etc.). As such, participants could make use of
such category-level information to support the recognition of uncom
mon stimuli which would be less salient for non-famous faces. There
fore, we expected less of a benefit of prior knowledge on overall
recognition as compared to Experiments 1 and 2.

Procedure
Participants made Remember-Know judgements on 128 common
and 128 uncommon food and beverage items (96 targets, 32 foils each)
using an identical procedure to Experiment 2 s mixed design. First,
participants performed 8 study-test blocks for the immediate test, fol
lowed by a brief interview regarding their memory strategies. After
wards, participants were given a surprise delayed recognition memory
test, as in Experiment 2. All 256 images from the previous 8 blocks of the
experiment (i.e., both studied targets and novel foils) in addition to 32
entirely novel unstudied foils (16 common and 16 uncommon) were
included in a fully randomized order for the delayed test. The surprise
delayed recognition test followed an identical procedure to Experiment
2, including an additional question asking participants how much they
would want to consume the food or beverage on a 5-point scale.
On average, participants recognized 91% (SD = 6%) of common
foods and beverages, while failing to recognize 91% (SD = 6%) of the
uncommon foods and beverages. Common food and beverages were
associated with an average prior knowledge rating of 3.47 (SD = 0.64)
across all participants. Overall, these data suggest that the common
stimuli used in this experiment reliably evoked prior knowledge in our
participants. Final analyses were restricted to only include stimuli that
were correctly recognized as either common or uncommon in the post-

Methods
Participants
Fifty-five young adults between 19 and 30 years of age participated
10

B. Bellana et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 121 (2021) 104264

test. It is possible that participants recognized uncommon food and
beverages, but excluding these trials more closely followed the pro
cedures from the previous experiments.

between prior knowledge and encoding duration was driven by a larger
benefit of longer study for uncommon [t(47) = 6.97, p < .0001, Cohen's
d = 0.35] as compared to common foods and beverages [t(47) = 3.85, p
= .0004, Cohen's d = 0.19]. Finally, the interaction between encoding
duration and response type revealed that encoding duration also
benefitted Remember [t(47) = 7.21, p < .0001, Cohen's d = .14] as
opposed to Know hits [t(47) = - 1.65, p = 0.10, Cohen's d = - 0.05].
False alarm rates were also submitted to a 2 (prior knowledge:
famous, non-famous) x 2 (response type: Remember, Know) repeated
measures ANOVA (see Fig. 5B). A main effect of response type reached
significance [F(1,47) = 12.2, p = 0.001, 2G = .055], driven by fewer
Remember false alarms as compared to Know. No effects involving prior
knowledge reached significance [F =< 1].

Results
Prior knowledge does not improve overall recognition
The effect of prior knowledge and encoding duration on recognition
d was measured using a 2 (prior knowledge: common, uncommon) x 2
(encoding duration: 1 s, 4 s) repeated measures ANOVA (see Fig. 5A). A
significant main effect of encoding duration was observed [F(1,47) =
59.87, p < 0.0001, 2G = .02], as longer exposure during study was
associated with better memory. The main effect of prior knowledge was
not statistically significant [F(1,47) = 0.14, p = 0.71, 2G = .001]. An
interaction between prior knowledge and encoding duration [F(1,47) =
7.47, p = 0.009, 2G = .002] was also observed, driven by a larger benefit
of encoding duration on recognition for uncommon [t(47) = 7.54, p <
0.0001, Cohen's d = 0.34] as compared to common foods and beverages
[t(47) = 3.71, p = 0.0005, Cohen's d = 0.20].

Prior knowledge boosts source memory hits
Next, objective source memory accuracy from all accurately recog
nized trials were submitted to a 2 (prior knowledge: common, uncom
mon) x 2 (encoding duration: 1 s, 4 s) repeated measures ANOVA (see
Fig. 5D). A main effect of prior knowledge was significant [F(1,47) =
18.38, p < 0.0001, 2G = .053], as common foods and beverages were
associated with better source memory accuracy than their uncommon
counterparts. A marginal effect of encoding duration was also observed
[F(1,47) = 3.08, p = 0.086, 2G = .004], providing some evidence that
longer encoding durations may have benefitted objective source
memory.
To unpack the effect of prior knowledge on source memory accuracy,
source memory response rates were submitted to a 2 (prior knowledge:
famous, non-famous) x 3 (response type: hit, false alarm, miss) repeated
measures ANOVA (see Fig. 5E). A significant interaction between prior
knowledge and response type was observed [F(2,94) = 33.51, p <
0.0001, 2G = .055]. Common foods and beverages were associated with
more source hits [t(47) = 6.72, p < 0.0001, Cohen's d = 0.30], fewer
source false alarms [t(47) = - 2.09, p = 0.042, Cohen's d = - 0.06], and a
fewer source misses [t(47) = - 5.65, p < 0.0001, Cohen's d = - 0.15].

Prior knowledge leads to more Remember hits
Although prior knowledge did not boost overall recognition with
food and beverages, it remains possible that it can differentially support
Remember as opposed to Know responses, providing subjective evidence
for more detailed memory. To this end, Remember and Know response
rates were analyzed separately for hits and false alarms. First, hit rates
were examined using a 2 (prior knowledge: common, uncommon) x 2
(encoding duration: 1 s, 4 s) x 2 (response type: Remember, Know)
repeated measures ANOVA (see Fig. 5B). Significant interactions be
tween prior knowledge and encoding duration [F(1,47) = 8.11, p =
0.007, 2G = .001], prior knowledge and response type [F(1,47) = 82.00,
p < 0.0001, 2G = .34], and encoding duration and response type [F
(1,47) = 20.76, p < 0.0001, 2G = .016] were observed. To examine the
relationship between prior knowledge and memory detail, we first
unpacked the interaction between prior knowledge and response type.
Paired t-tests revealed that, indeed, common foods and beverages were
associated with a steep increase in Remember hits [t(47) = 9.37, p <
.0001, Cohen's d = 1.20] and a comparably sharp drop in Know hits [t
(47) = - 8.46, p < 0.0001, Cohen's d = - 1.15]. Next, the interaction

A graded effect of prior knowledge on memory for extrinsic context
The relation between degree of prior knowledge and estimates of
extrinsic context (i.e., Remember and source memory) were tested using
an identical multilevel logistic regression procedure as employed in

Fig. 5. Results from Experiment 3: General
replication of the prior knowledge benefit on
overall recognition and memory for extrinsic
context using food and beverage stimuli. (A)
Effect of prior knowledge (i.e., common,
uncommon) and encoding duration (1 s, 4 s)
on overall recognition accuracy [i.e., d = z
(hits) - z(false alarms)]. (B) Overall recog
nition unpacked into proportion of hits and
false alarms for Remember and Know re
sponses, separately. Note that common food
items were associated with a boost in
Remember hits. (C) Results of mixed effects
logistic regression predicting the likelihood
of a Remember hit for common food/bever
ages based on degree of prior knowledge.
Grey envelope represents 95% confidence
intervals estimated around the regression
parameter using 500 bootstraps. Black histogram reflects the distribution of prior knowledge ratings for all Remember hit trials. Grey histogram reflects prior
knowledge ratings for all other trials. Dashed lines represent the mean of each distribution, respectively. (D) Effect of prior knowledge and encoding duration on
source memory accuracy [i.e., d = z(source hits) - z(source false alarms)]. (E) Source memory accuracy unpacked into hits (accurate source), false alarms (source
misattribution), and misses (forgotten source). Proportion in the case of source memory is based on the total of trials with correct item recognition only. (F) Results of
mixed effects model predicting the likelihood of a source memory hit based on degree of prior knowledge. Histograms, medians and confidence intervals were
derived identically to Fig. 5C, except using source hits vs. other source trials (i.e., false alarms, misses). Error bars for all bar plots represent standard error of the
mean.
11

B. Bellana et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 121 (2021) 104264

Experiment 2. Logistic regression models are plotted in Fig. 5C and F.
Wald tests again revealed that degree of prior knowledge predicted
Remember responses (X2(1) = 71.23,  = 0.25,  95% CI = [0.19, 0.30],
p < .0001). The relationship between prior knowledge and objective
source memory accuracy was also statistically significant, though weak
(X2(1) = 11.97,  = 0.10,  95% CI = [0.04, 0.15], p = .0005). Overall,
these results extend the positive relation between degree of prior
knowledge and memory for extrinsic context beyond face stimuli.

under incidental encoding. We did not observe a benefit of prior
knowledge on overall recognition or delayed recognition under inten
tional encoding. One plausible explanation for this discrepancy is the
heterogeneity associated with food and beverages as compared to faces.
The food and beverage stimuli used in this experiment were highly
discriminable at the category-level (e.g., type of food/beverage) and
associated visual features (e.g., shape, colour). Furthermore, all stimuli
were clearly branded, and verbal labels are known to be powerful de
terminants of memory performance for novel stimuli (Lupyan, Rakison,
& McClelland, 2007; Schwartz & Yovel, 2016). Unlike with unfamiliar
faces, that are an especially homogeneous stimulus class, participants
could make use of the distinctive attributes of uncommon food and
beverages to support memory performance even in the absence of prior
knowledge. Another difference between food and beverage stimuli as
compared to faces is that they were more likely to elicit accurate Know
responses as compared to faces, where correct recognition tends to be
driven by Remember responses (see Figs. 3B and 5B). The precise rea
sons why this occur remain an open question. One possibility is that the
availability of category level information (e.g., chocolate bar, cereal,
soda) and visible brand names may have elicited recognition strategies
that were not available for faces, which in turn had downstream con
sequences on the relative frequency of Remember and Know hits.
Across three experiments, we demonstrate that prior knowledge in
creases the likelihood of recalling extrinsic contextual details from a
study episode. These findings are consistent with resource-based ac
counts of memory (e.g., DeWitt et al., 2012; Diana & Reder, 2006; Popov
& Reder, 2020; Reder et al., 2013), but inconsistent with schema-based
accounts that posit an inverse relationship between the activation of preexisting knowledge and the encoding of episodic details from a study
episode (e.g., van Kesteren et al., 2012). Evidence for schema-based
generalization, however, may be restricted to memory for the percep
tual details that make up the studied target itself. In other words, the
process of chunking information in a study episode may be lossy rather
than lossless (Sayood, 2003; see also Mathy & Feldman, 2012; Nassar
et al., 2018; Norris & Kalm, 2018), leading to a specific loss of precision
for the chunked information itself, while simultaneously freeing re
sources for the encoding of extrinsic context. Alternatively, a pure
resource-based account would predict a general boost in memory detail
for familiar stimuli, given they require fewer resources to encode,
leaving more attentional resources to available to encode intrinsic and
extrinsic context alike. We examine these possibilities in Experiment 4.

Prior knowledge facilitates the incidental formation of durable memories
To test the lasting effects of prior knowledge on recognition memory,
we analyzed performance on a surprise delayed recognition memory test
presented after the completion of the 8 study-test blocks. The lasting
effects of prior knowledge and encoding duration on delayed recogni
tion accuracy (d ) of intentionally studied targets were measured using a
2 (prior knowledge: common, uncommon) x 2 (encoding duration: 1 s,
4 s) repeated-measures ANOVA (see Fig. 6). A significant main effect of
encoding duration was observed [F(1,47) = 4.20, p = 0.046, 2G = .002].
Interestingly, the main effect prior knowledge [F(1,47) = 1.05, p = 0.31,
2G = .004] and the interaction between with prior knowledge and
encoding duration [F(1,47) = 1.86, p = 0.18, 2G = .001] were not sta
tistically significant.
Lastly, we examined whether we could replicate the benefit of prior
knowledge on the incidental formation of durable memories. Therefore,
the effects of prior knowledge and encoding type on delayed recognition
accuracy (d ) were measured using a 2 (prior knowledge: common,
uncommon) x 2 (encoding type: intentional, incidental) repeatedmeasures ANOVA (see Fig. 6). A significant interaction between prior
knowledge x encoding type was observed [F(1,47) = 33.07, p < 0.0001,
2G = .013]. Tests of simple effects were conducted using pairwise t-tests
comparing the effect of prior knowledge on delayed recognition for
intentional and incidental targets separately. As reported above, the
benefit of prior knowledge on delayed recognition accuracy was not
statistically significant for intentional encoding [t(47) = 1.03, p = 0.31,
Cohen's d = 0.08], whereas this effect was robust for incidental encoding
[t(47) = 4.32, p < 0.001, Cohen's d = 0.51]. This finding partially rep
licates our previous results with faces, in which prior knowledge facil
itated the incidental formation of durable memories.
Interim summary
Experiment 3 generally replicated the results of Experiments 1 and 2
using food and beverage stimuli. Common images were associated with
a shift towards Remember hits and improved source memory accuracy,
providing strong evidence for a domain-general benefit of prior
knowledge on memory for extrinsic context, consistent with resourcebased accounts. Prior knowledge also benefitted delayed recognition

Experiment 4
To adjudicate between a resource-based and schema-based account
of how prior knowledge should influence memory for intrinsic context,
we conducted a final experiment based on the mnemonic similarity task
(MST) (Kirwan & Stark, 2007; Stark et al., 2013). In the MST, accurate
recognition requires the correct rejection of highly perceptually similar
lures. Therefore, if the benefit of prior knowledge extends to the precise,
perceptual details that make up the studied target itself, then partici
pants should be able to use these representations to accurately
discriminate between studied targets and highly similar lures.
Methods
Participants
Seventy-five young adults between 19 and 30 years of age partici
pated in the experiment. Participants were recruited from the University
of Toronto and surrounding areas and were compensated $10/hour. An
average testing session lasted 2 h. Fifteen participants did not meet our
inclusion criteria for the final sample and were excluded from subse
quent analyses [i.e., did not recognize at least 70% of famous or
correctly reject at least 70% of non-famous faces (n = 14), or issues with
the experiment software (n = 1)]. Our final sample consisted of 60

Fig. 6. Delayed recognition from Experiment 3: Prior knowledge benefited
recognition accuracy for a surprise delayed recognition test for all 256 food and
beverage images from the experiment. Common food and beverages were better
remembered when they were studied incidentally as correctly rejected foils
during the immediate test (Incidental), highlighting the efficiency of the process
when prior knowledge is available. Longer encoding duration failed to produce
a comparable benefit on delayed recognition.
12

B. Bellana et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 121 (2021) 104264

participants (years of age: M = 22.5, SD = 3.3; years of education: M =
15.8, SD = 2.4; nfemale = 45), and was comparable in size to previous
publications using this paradigm (e.g., Stark et al., 2013).

subject, on a scale of 1 (very little) to 5 (a lot). On average, participants
recognized 87% (SD = 12%) of famous faces, while failing to recognize
89% (SD = 8%) of the non-famous faces. Famous faces were associated
with an average prior knowledge rating of 3.39 (SD = 1.33) across all
participants. Overall, these data suggest that the famous faces used in
this experiment reliably evoked prior knowledge in our participants.
Note: except for objective source memory, which was not collected,
all results from Experiment 2 were replicated in Experiment 4 (for de
tails, see Supplementary Material: Section 6).

Stimuli
Identical face images from Experiment 1 and 2 were used in Exper
iment 4. Unlike the previous experiments, each image was flipped hor
izontally to produce mirror images of the original stimuli. Therefore, by
capitalizing on the slight variations between original and flipped im
ages, we were able to test whether the observed benefits of prior
knowledge on recollection would also extend to more fine-grained
perceptual discriminations during recognition (i.e., recognition of face
identity and orientation), while holding the low-level visual properties
of the stimuli constant. To confirm that faces were comparably sym
metrical, we correlated the pixel intensities of the two image halves.
Pearson correlations were then compared using an independent samples
t-test, confirming that famous and non-famous faces comparably sym
metrical (Mfamous = 0.87, Mnon-famous = 0.85; t(254) = 1.47, p = 0.14).
One remaining concern with this paradigm is the possibility that famous
faces are more likely to be recognized as flipped during encoding, which
could then lead to a difference in encoding strategies. However, a con
trol experiment on a separate group of participants indicated that they
could not reliably detect which of the two images was the original or
flipped, for famous and non-famous faces alike (see Supplementary
Material: Section 5).

Results
A prior knowledge-dependent bias towards failing to detect changes in
intrinsic context
We were interested in examining the effect of prior knowledge on
memory for intrinsic context and not simple discrimination between
targets and foils. Therefore, recognition was defined as the degree to
which participants could accurately recall the studied orientation of a
given face, over and above its identity. For old trials, d was calculated as
the standardized likelihood of responding old to and old trial, minus the
likelihood of responding old to a similar trial (i.e., z(old hit) - z(old false
alarm)). For similar trials, d was calculated as the standardized likeli
hood of responding similar to a similar trial, minus the likelihood of
responding similar to an old trial (i.e., z(similar hit) - z(similar false
alarm)).
The effect of prior knowledge and trial type on recognition accuracy
was measured using a 2 (prior knowledge: famous, non-famous) x 2
(response type: old, similar) repeated measures ANOVA (see Fig. 7A). A
significant main effect of prior knowledge was observed [F(1,59) =
16.68, p = 0.0001, 2G = .041], indicating that the overall likelihood of
recalling the studied orientation of a given face, beyond recognizing its
identity, was higher for famous as compared to non-famous faces. The
interaction between prior knowledge and trial type was also statistically
significant [F(1,59) = 6.71, p = 0.003, 2G = .003], driven by a larger
benefit of prior knowledge for similar trials [t(59) = 4.63, p < 0.0001,
Cohen's d = 0.49] as compared to old trials [t(59) = 2.84, p = 0.006,
Cohen's d = 0.32].
The above results suggest that overall discriminability is better for
famous as compared to non-famous faces. For a more nuanced exami
nation of memory performance, we further unpacked recognition into
hits, false alarms and misses. Hits refer to studied trials in which studied
orientation is correctly recognized; false alarms refer to studied trials in
which a participant endorses the incorrect orientation; misses refer to
studied trials that a participant endorses as new. Response rates were
submitted to a 2 (prior knowledge: famous, non-famous) x 2 (trial type:
old, similar) x 3 (response type: hits, false alarm, miss) repeated mea
sures ANOVA (see Fig. 7B). A significant 3-way interaction was observed
[F(2,118) = 48.31, p < 0.0001, 2G = .084]. Simple effects were con
ducted by examining old and similar trials separately. For old trials, the
interaction between prior knowledge and response type was significant
[F(2,118) = 61.97, p < 0.0001, 2G = .191]. Famous faces were associ
ated with the standard pattern of better memory for old trials: more hits
[t(59) = 9.96, p < 0.0001, Cohen's d = 0.82], fewer false alarms [t(59) =
- 4.09, p = 0.0001, Cohen's d = - 0.45], and fewer misses [t(59) =
- 7.80, p < 0.0001, Cohen's d = - 0.47].
Interestingly, a different pattern emerged for similar trials. For
similar trials, the interaction between prior knowledge and response
type was significant [F(2,118) = 44.56, p < 0.0001, 2G = .145], but
famous faces showed no benefit for hits [t(59) = - 0.54, p = 0.59,
Cohen's d = - 0.04], a sizeable increase in false alarms [t(59) = 7.83, p <
0.0001, Cohen's d = 0.90], and fewer misses [t(59) = - 9.31, p < 0.0001,
Cohen's d = - 0.50].
The observed increase in false alarms on similar trials is consistent
with a prior knowledge-dependent shift in the response criterion par
ticipants use: irrespective of a face's actual studied orientation, prior

Procedure
In Experiment 4, we used a procedure based on the MST (Kirwan &
Stark, 2007; Stark et al., 2013). This paradigm incorporates similar lures
into the standard recognition memory paradigm of targets and foils, thus
affording a test of more precise stimulus representations in memory. The
details of our paradigm were largely consistent with our previous ex
periments, with some important distinctions. I) As we were primarily
interested in prior knowledge, we held encoding duration constant at 3
s. II) In place of manipulating encoding duration, we manipulated
whether or not a studied face was presented in the same orientation
across encoding and retrieval (i.e., old) or flipped (i.e., similar), within
participants. Therefore, just like the manipulation of encoding duration
in Experiments 1-3, half of the studied faces were old trials and half
were similar trials, and this was true for both famous and non-famous
faces. Also, half of the old and similar trials were initially encoded in
the original orientation and half in the flipped orientation to further
ensure pre-experimental familiarity with a face would not affect the
likelihood of noticing a change in orientation. III) During test, partici
pants were required to decide whether the target face was presented in
the same orientation as at encoding (i.e., old), presented in a flipped
orientation as compared to encoding (i.e., similar), or was not studied at
all (i.e., new). If participants responded either old or similar, an addi
tional prompt appeared asking them to categorize the subjective expe
rience of recognition using Remember and Know, in line with our
previous experiments.
After 8 study-test blocks of task were completed, participants were
briefly interviewed for ~5 min regarding their memory strategies. Like
Experiments 2 and 3, participants then underwent the surprise delayed
recognition memory procedure. All 256 face pairs from the previous 8
blocks of the experiment (i.e., both studied targets and novel foils) in
addition to 32 entirely novel unstudied pairs (16 famous and 16 nonfamous) were included in a fully randomized order. For each trial, the
original and flipped versions of a face were presented on either the left
or right side of the screen, with position randomly shuffled per trial. In
addition to measuring delayed recognition memory and degree of prior
knowledge for each face (see Procedure for Experiments 2 and 3), the
surprise delayed recognition memory task for Experiment 4 also elicited
a rating of how perceptually different the faces in pair appeared to each
13

B. Bellana et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 121 (2021) 104264

Fig. 7. Results from Experiment 4: Prior knowledge is associated with a loss of intrinsic context in memory. Recognition in this experiment was based on the
mnemonic similarity task (MST), in which faces could either be presented in the same orientation from study to test (Old) or horizontally flipped from study to test
(Similar). Recognition was defined as the likelihood of correctly endorsing identical faces as old (same orientation from study to test) [i.e., d = z(hits for old trials) - z
(false alarms for similar trials)] or correctly endorsing a flipped face as similar (different orientation from study to test) [i.e., d = z(hits for similar trials) - z(false
alarms to old trials)]. (A) Effect of prior knowledge (i.e., famous, non-famous) and encoding duration (1 s, 4 s) on recognition accuracy in the MST, revealing an
overall accuracy benefit. (B) Recognition accuracy unpacked in this hits (correctly remembering orientation), false alarms (misremembering orientation) and misses
(forgetting orientation) for Old and Similar trials separately. Proportion is relative to all trials on which general item recognition was accurate, as opposed to all
studied trials. In addition to an increase in old hits, prior knowledge was also associated with an increase in falsely endorsing similar faces as old. (C) Effect of prior
knowledge on relative response criterion [i.e., c = -1/2 [z(hits) + z(false alarms)]/d ]. Prior knowledge was associated with a shift towards a more liberal response
criterion for making old responses. (i.e., unchanged from study to test). Error bars represent standard error of the mean.

knowledge was associated with an overall increased likelihood of clas
sifying a face as old, or unchanged from study. To better quantify this
apparent response bias, we calculated the relative response criterion
(c'). c' is defined as the criterion c (where c = -1/2 [z(hits) + z(false
alarms)]) divided by discriminability d (where d = z(hits) - z(false
alarms)) (Macmillan & Creelman, 1990). A c' of 0 would indicate un
biased signal detection, while a positive value would indicate a bias
towards failing to detect the signal irrespective of its presence (i.e., a
conservative response criterion), and a negative value would indicate a
bias towards detecting the signal irrespective of its presence (i.e., a
liberal response criterion). c was calculated separately for famous and
non-famous faces, and for old and similar responses.
The effect of prior knowledge and response type on c' was measured
using a 2 (prior knowledge: famous, non-famous) x 2 (response type:
old, similar) repeated measures ANOVA. Critically, we observed a sig
nificant interaction between prior knowledge and response type [F
(1,59) = 5.10, p = 0.03, 2G = .01] (see Fig. 7C). As expected, paired ttests indicated that famous faces were indeed associated with a signifi
cantly lower c' (i.e., more liberal response criterion) than non-famous
faces specifically when classifying a face as old [t(59) = - 2.80, p =
0.007, Cohen's d = - 0.47]. Prior knowledge had no such impact on c' for
similar responses [t(59) = - 0.73, p = 0.47, Cohen's d = - 0.14].
Therefore, participants were indeed more likely to endorse a famous
face as old (i.e., presented in the same orientation as study) irrespective
of its actual studied orientation. This shift in response criterion resulted
in a higher likelihood of failing to detect a change in intrinsic context
when present, particularly when prior knowledge was available.
Furthermore, we replicated this increase in false alarms for similar trials
in a separate sample of younger adults (see Supplementary Material:
Section 7).

General discussion
Across a series of four experiments, we provide evidence for a robust
benefit of prior knowledge on our ability to remember the extrinsic
context from a study episode. For face and food stimuli alike, prior
knowledge facilitated accurate Remember responses and objective
source memory accuracy. Participants' self-reported degree of prior
knowledge for a given stimulus predicted its likelihood of being recalled
with additional contextual details from the study episode. Despite
quadrupling the length of study, encoding duration did not benefit
memory for extrinsic context to the same extent. Critically, prior
knowledge did not benefit memory for intrinsic context. Although
famous faces were associated with better recognition, participants were
less likely to notice when their orientation was reversed between study
and test as compared to non-famous faces. This finding points to a loss of
memory for intrinsic context when prior knowledge is available, despite
a facilitatory effect on the encoding of extrinsic context. Overall, these
data provide important insight into how a combination of resource and
schema-based accounts provides a better explanation for the data on
memory detail than either model alone.
Prior knowledge and memory detail
A benefit of prior knowledge on memory for extrinsic context is
consistent with previous studies on associative memory and source
memory (Brandt et al., 2005; DeWitt et al., 2012; Horry et al., 2010; Liu
et al., 2016; Long et al., 2008; Long & Prat, 2002; Poppenk et al., 2010;
Reder et al., 2013), and further corroborate the few studies that report a
positive relationship between source memory and degree of prior
knowledge (DeWitt et al., 2012; Long et al., 2008). These results are also
consistent with the effect of deep processing on recollection. Attending
to the semantic meaning associated with a stimulus is more likely to
produce recollection than attending to its surface-level perceptual fea
tures (Bower & Karlin, 1974; Craik, 2002; Craik & Lockhart, 1972;
Yonelinas, 2002). One possible explanation for these results may be that
attending to semantic meaning facilitates the parsing of incoming
experience into memorable chunks. For example, Mathy and Feldman
(2012) report better memory for sequences of digits that contained runs
of increasing or decreasing values as compared to more erratic se
quences. They argued that this finding supports a chunking account, in
which any available structure in an input stream can be compressed,
which leads to better encoding. Similar findings have been reported in
studies in which participants are experimentally familiarized with novel
memoranda. In Reder et al. (2016), participants were exposed to pre
viously unfamiliar Chinese characters over the course of a month and

Interim summary
Famous faces were associated with better overall discriminability in
the MST paradigm, but examining hit and false alarm rates separately
revealed a general bias towards endorsing famous faces as old (i.e., same
orientation as study). This led to a high hit rate for famous trials that
were presented in the same orientation as study, but also sizeable false
alarm rates when the face orientation was flipped. These data provide
initial evidence that famous faces may be better remembered overall,
however this benefit may come at the cost of memory for fine-grained
intrinsic details.

14

B. Bellana et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 121 (2021) 104264

measures of associative memory increased as participants became more
familiar with the characters, despite the associations themselves being
novel. Therefore, stimuli whose semantic associations are accessible, via
pre-experimental familiarity or an experimental manipulation like deep
processing or when a stimulus gains significance over multiple expo
sures, may be encoded more efficiently into memory than unfamiliar
stimuli. In line with this account, DeWitt et al. (2012) demonstrate that
the benefit of prior knowledge on source memory is lost when attention
is divided at encoding, but not at retrieval. These results are inconsistent
with schema-based accounts that propose an inverse relationship be
tween the activation of prior knowledge and the encoding of episodic
details (e.g., van Kesteren et al., 2012).
However, an exclusively resource-based explanation cannot account
for the subtle yet reliable decrease in memory for intrinsic context
observed for familiar stimuli. Using the MST paradigm, we demonstrate
that famous faces were associated with higher false alarm rates to
similar trials (see Fig. 7B). In other words, participants were more likely
to consider famous faces to be presented in the same orientation from
study to test and consequently failed to notice when a famous face was
horizontally flipped. Therefore, the benefit of prior knowledge on
memory for extrinsic context may come at the cost of the precision with
which the stimulus itself is represented (i.e., intrinsic context). This
finding is consistent with the idea that famous faces may evoke a general
impression of what the individual looks like, which in turn interferes
with the encoding of the particularities of their appearance in a given
study episode. Recent work with faces suggests that attending to con
ceptual information when studying an unfamiliar face improves recog
nition across different lightings and viewpoints (Schwartz & Yovel,
2019), suggesting attending to conceptual information supports the
formation of memory representations that are less tethered to the spe
cific image from study (also see Armann et al., 2016; Schwartz & Yovel,
2016). Another compelling account is that the process of parsing our
experience into meaningful chunks may rely on lossy, rather than loss
less, compression (Sayood, 2003; see also Nassar et al., 2018; Norris &
Kalm, 2018). Our memory is far from a direct recapitulation of our
experience, and evidence for information loss in episodic memory can be
found in studies of memory errors (Schacter, Guerin, & St Jacques,
2011). In his classic work, Bartlett reported systematic errors in par
ticipants' recall of stories, in which unfamiliar terms were forgotten and
replaced with more familiar concepts (Bartlett, 1932, see also, Rojahn &
Pettigrew, 1992; Stangor & Mcmillan, 1992). Another common example
of schema-based memory errors comes from the `Deese-RoedigerMcDermott (DRM) paradigm', in which studying conceptually related
words (e.g., bed, night, pillow, tired, etc.) elicits false memory for an
unstudied lure (e.g., sleep) (Roediger & McDermott, 1995). These errors,
however, are not observed in patients with schema processing deficits
associated with ventromedial frontal lesions (Melo, Winocur, & Mos
covitch, 1999; Warren, Jones, Duff, & Tranel, 2014).
If our capacity to encode details from a study episode were limitless,
we should not observe these kinds of memory distortions. Instead, our
memory system systematically exploits our prior knowledge to over
come our limited encoding resources. We rely on our existing long-term
memory representations and schema instead of encoding all the features
from our surroundings anew. This kind of data compression or
knowledge-based inference may be computationally efficient (e.g.
Mathy & Feldman, 2012), but it appears to come at the cost of memory
for intra-item details. This may be especially the case when using
complex stimuli, like images of faces, as opposed to lower dimensional
stimuli, like words or digits, which may be more easily compressed
without information loss. Broadly, our results provide evidence for a loss
of memory detail specific to the item itself when prior knowledge is
available, highlighting a potential role of schema-based generalization
mechanisms in the context of forming detailed memories.
It is important to note, that the data compression metaphor has
limitations in its ability to describe human memory. For example,
compression algorithms can perfectly decompress (or, reconstruct)

compressed data, recreating the encoded representation exactly every
time. In other words, even if information were to be lost during
encoding, the retrieval mechanism is perfect. Human memory is
constructive process and cannot accomplish this perfect mapping be
tween compressed and decompressed representations (e.g., Schacter,
Guerin, & St Jacques, 2011). Therefore, we contend that a data
compression framework may be useful for conceptualizing how we
chunk incoming experience (i.e., encoding). Specifically, it highlights
that the specific way in which the chunking process is operationalized
will have consequences on the fidelity of the encoded representation.
Another caveat regarding the data compression metaphor is that it
implies that intrinsic context is lost during encoding. Alternatively, the
intrinsic context may be initially encoded for familiar stimuli only to
become inaccessible during later retrieval. Another possibility may be
that the intrinsic context is both encoded and retrieved but the strong
item memory signal associated with famous faces nonetheless leads to a
general shift towards a more liberal response criterion for "old" trials.
The present experiment cannot adjudicate between these possible ex
planations. Nonetheless, our data provide depict a subtle yet reliable
impairment in memory performance when assessing the intrinsic
context of a studied stimulus, particularly when prior knowledge is
available.
Prior knowledge and the incidental formation of durable memories
Prior knowledge also supports the formation of durable memories.
Studied famous faces were more likely to be recognized during a surprise
delayed recognition test than studied non-famous faces. This finding is
in line with previous behavioural work showing better memory for
familiar stimuli after a delay (Scapinello & Yarmey, 1970). Also previous
studies on expertise have reported expertise-related performance bene
fits on surprise memory tests for the positions of pieces on a chess board
(Goldin, 1979) or cards that make up a hand in a game of bridge (Engle
& Bukstel, 1978). Improved delayed recognition is also consistent with
neural evidence suggesting that prior knowledge is critical for rapid
neocortical learning (McClelland, 2013; Sharon et al., 2011; Tse et al.,
2007), acting as a "fast route" to memory consolidation (Antony et al.,
2017; Gilboa & Marlatte, 2017). Newly learned information becomes
stable through consolidation, a process that occurs gradually over time,
allowing newly formed memories represented via the hippocampus to
integrate with existing knowledge in the neocortex (Kitamura et al.,
2017; Liu et al., 2016; Liu, Grady, & Moscovitch, 2018; McClelland,
2013; McClelland et al., 1995). The gradual aspect is necessary for
successful consolidation as existing knowledge structures are prone to
interference if integration occurs too quickly, particularly when the new
learning is inconsistent with prior knowledge (McClelland, McNaugh
ton, O'Reilly, 1995; McClelland, 2013). Information that is already
consistent with prior knowledge actually facilitates learning, allowing
for more rapid acquisition of durable memory traces represented in the
neocortex. The present data do not allow for adequate time between
initial study and delayed test for a complete consolidation-based
explanation, but they do highlight robust learning in a highly
interference-prone context, which may reflect the early stages of an
efficient consolidation process (Dudai, Karni, & Born, 2015, see also Li,
Hu, & Yang, 2020).
Furthermore, we observed a benefit of prior knowledge on delayed
recognition for both intentional (faces) and incidental (faces and food/
beverages) encoding conditions, suggesting that explicit study is not
necessary to produce this benefit. Similar effects have been observed
with depth of encoding manipulations for both studied targets (Craik &
Tulving, 1975; Masson & McDaniel, 1981) and incidentally learned foils
(Craik & Lockhart, 1972; Jacoby, Shimizu, Daniels, & Rhodes, 2005).
Jacoby et al. (2005) presented participants with two lists of words, one
learned deeply (pleasantness judgement) and another learned more
shallowly (judge whether each word had the vowel O or U). During test,
participants were again presented with two lists, one containing deeply
15

B. Bellana et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 121 (2021) 104264

processed targets and novel foils and another containing shallowly
processed targets and novel foils. Next, participants performed a final
recognition memory test, in which they were presented with the foils
from the previous test and entirely novel foils. Recognition performance
for the foils from the deeply processed list was superior to that of the
shallow-list. The authors propose a `source constrained retrieval' ac
count, such that the deep processing engaged during encoding was
reinstated during test, allowing for deeper encoding of the foils. Such an
account would not apply to the present experiment, as our novel foils
could elicit deeper processing themselves by virtue of their familiarity.
However, in both our data and those of Jacoby et al., attending to the
semantic associations available for a given stimulus resulted in better
incidental encoding of novel foils. Considering that deep processing
demands attention (Craik, Eftekhari, & Binns, 2018), processing is
necessarily shallower when fewer attentional resources are available,
irrespective of whether the encoding is intentional or incidental.
Therefore, if the old-new judgement required less attentional resources
for famous faces, as would be predicted by a resource-based account,
then more resources would be available to encode the stimulus foils -
even if incidentally.

Arski and Anna Waisman for their help with stimulus collection, Mar
ilyne Ziegler for her assistance with Eprime, and Sathesan Thavabala
singam for sharing the code for the logistic regression plots. Also, the
authors would like to thank Nick Diamond, Jessica Robin, Tarek Amer
and Iva Brunec for many helpful discussions along the way.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jml.2021.104264.
References
Alba, J. W., & Hasher, L. (1983). Is memory schematic? Psychological Bulletin, 93(2),
203-231. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.93.2.203.
Antony, J. W., Ferreira, C. S., Norman, K. A., & Wimber, M. (2017). Retrieval as a Fast
Route to Memory Consolidation. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 21(8), 573-576.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2017.05.001.
Armann, R. G. M., Jenkins, R., & Burton, A. (2016). A familiarity disadvantage for
remembering specific images of faces. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 42(4), 571-580. https://doi.org/10.1037/xhp0000174.
Backman, L. (1991). Recognition memory across the adult life span: The role of prior
knowledge. Memory & Cognition, 19(1), 63-71. https://doi.org/10.3758/
BF03198496.
Bar, M., Aminoff, E., & Ishai, A. (2008). Famous faces activate contextual associations in
the parahippocampal cortex. Cerebral Cortex, 18(6), 1233-1238. https://doi.org/
10.1093/cercor/bhm170.
Bartlett, F. C. (1932). Remembering: A Study in Experimental and Social Psychology - Sir
Frederic Charles Bartlett, Frederic C. Bartlett, Frederic Charles Bartlett - Google
Books. Cambridge University Press. Retrieved from https://books.google.ca/books?
hl=en&lr=&id=WG5ZcHGTrm4C&oi=fnd&pg=PR9&dq=bartlett+remembering
&ots=BEa_ktMnmK&sig=ljmJvEtS5todPGoPu0W0HlWZGfA#v=onepage&q=bar
tlett remembering&f=false.
Bates, D., Machler, M., Bolker, B. M., & Walker, S. C. (2015). Fitting linear mixed-effects
models using lme4. Journal of Statistical Software, 67(1). https://doi.org/10.18637/
jss.v067.i01.
Bein, O., Duncan, K., & Davachi, L. (2020). Mnemonic prediction errors bias
hippocampal states. Nature Communications, 11(1). https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41467-020-17287-1.
Bein, O., Reggev, N., & Maril, A. (2020). Prior knowledge promotes hippocampal
separation but cortical assimilation in the left inferior frontal gyrus. Nature
Communications, 11(1), 1-13. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-18364-1.
Bein, O., Trzewik, M., & Maril, A. (2019). The role of prior knowledge in incremental
associative learning: An empirical and computational approach. Journal of Memory
and Language, 107, 1-24. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2019.03.006.
Bird, C. M., Davies, R. A., Ward, J., & Burgess, N. (2011). Effects of pre-experimental
knowledge on recognition memory. Learning and Memory, 18(1), 11-14. https://doi.
org/10.1101/lm.1952111.
Bower, G. H., & Karlin, M. B. (1974). Depth of processing pictures of faces and
recognition memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 103(4), 751-757. https://
doi.org/10.1037/h0037190.
Brady, T. F., Stormer, V. S., & Alvarez, G. A. (2016). Working memory is not fixedcapacity: More active storage capacity for real-world objects than for simple stimuli.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 113
(27), 7459-7464. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1520027113.
Brandt, K. R., Cooper, L. M., & Dewhurst, S. A. (2005). Expertise and recollective
experience: Recognition memory for familiar and unfamiliar academic subjects.
Applied Cognitive Psychology, 19(9), 1113-1125. https://doi.org/10.1002/acp.1163.
Bransford, J. D., & Johnson, M. K. (1972). Contextual prerequisites for understanding:
Some investigations of comprehension and recall. Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behavior, 11(6), 717-726. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-5371(72)80006-9.
Brod, G., Lindenberger, U., & Shing, Y. L. (2017). Neural activation patterns during
retrieval of schema-related memories: Differences and commonalities between
children and adults. Developmental Science, 20(6). https://doi.org/10.1111/
desc.12475.
Brod, G., Werkle-Bergner, M., & Shing, Y. L. (2013). The Influence of Prior Knowledge on
Memory: A Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience Perspective. Frontiers in
Behavioral Neuroscience, 7(October), 1-13. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fnbeh.2013.00139.
Chen, J., Honey, C. J., Simony, E., Arcaro, M. J., Norman, K. A., & Hasson, U. (2016).
Accessing Real-Life Episodic Information from Minutes versus Hours Earlier
Modulates Hippocampal and High-Order Cortical Dynamics. Cerebral Cortex, 26(8),
3428-3441. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhv155.
Chiesi, H. L., Spilich, G. J., & Voss, J. F. (1979). Acquisition of domain-related
information in relation to high and low domain knowledge. Journal of Verbal
Learning and Verbal Behavior. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-5371(79)90146-4.
Craik, F. I. M., Eftekhari, E., & Binns, M. A. (2018). Effects of divided attention at
encoding and retrieval: Further data. Memory and Cognition, 46(8), 1263-1277.
https://doi.org/10.3758/s13421-018-0835-3.
Craik, F. I. M. M. (2002). Levels of processing: Past, present and future? Memory, 10
(5-6), 305-318. https://doi.org/10.1080/09658210244000135.

Conclusions
The present study demonstrates that prior knowledge supports
memory for extrinsic context, or memory for extra-item details. Extrinsic
context was operationalized as Remember responses and objectives
source memory accuracy. In addition, the degree of prior knowledge
stored for a given stimulus predicted the likelihood of recollecting
extrinsic context along with the studied stimulus. The benefit of prior
knowledge on memory for extrinsic context was not reproduced to the
same extent by simply increasing exposure at encoding. Furthermore,
prior knowledge supported the formation of durable memories, even
under incidental encoding conditions, suggesting familiar stimuli are
more efficiently encoded into memory. Importantly, prior knowledge
was also associated with a subtle though reliable impairment in memory
for the precise details of the studied item itself, or intrinsic context. This
loss of precision for intra-item details cannot be easily accounted for by a
purely resource-based account of memory encoding and likely requires
the incorporation of a schema-based generalization mechanism. By
examining extrinsic and intrinsic context separately, we demonstrate
that resource and schema-based theories provide complementary, rather
than contradictory, accounts of how prior knowledge influences mem
ory detail.
Authors' Note
This research was supported by a Natural Sciences and Engineering
Research Council (NSERC) grant to M.M. (no. A8347), a Canadian In
stitutes of Health Research (CIHR) grant to C.L.G. (no. MOP-143311),
and scholarships awarded to B.B. from NSERC and the Ontario Grad
uate Scholarship program.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
B. Bellana: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis,
Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing. R. Mansour:
Investigation, Writing - review & editing. N. Ladyka-Wojcik: Investi
gation, Formal analysis, Writing - review & editing. C.L. Grady:
Conceptualization, Writing - review & editing, Supervision, Funding
acquisition. M. Moscovitch: Conceptualization, Writing - review &
editing, Supervision, Funding acquisition.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Shany Lahan, Olivia Arski, and
Tanya Grocholsky for their invaluable help with data collection, Olivia
16

B. Bellana et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 121 (2021) 104264
Kumaran, D., & Maguire, E. A. (2007). Which computational mechanisms operate in the
hippocampus during novelty detection? Hippocampus. https://doi.org/10.1002/
hipo.20326.
Lawrence, M. (2016). Easy Analysis and Visualization of Factorial Experiments.
Retrieved from https://cran.r-project.org/package=ez.
Li, C., Hu, Z., & Yang, J. (2020). Rapid acquisition through fast mapping: Stable memory
over time and role of prior knowledge. Learning and Memory, 27(5), 177-189.
https://doi.org/10.1101/lm.050138.119.
Liu, Z-X., Grady, C., & Moscovitch, M. (2018). The effect of prior knowledge on postencoding brain connectivity and its relation to subsequent memory. NeuroImage,
167, 211-223. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2017.11.032.
Liu, Z.-X., Grady, C., & Moscovitch, M. (2016). Effects of Prior-Knowledge on Brain
Activation and Connectivity During Associative Memory Encoding. Cerebral Cortex,
bhw047. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhw047.
Long, D. L., Prat, C., Johns, C., Morris, P., & Jonathan, E. (2008). The importance of
knowledge in vivid text memory: An individual-differences investigation of
recollection and familiarity. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 15(3), 604-609. https://
doi.org/10.3758/PBR.15.3.604.
Long, D. L., & Prat, C. S. (2002). Memory for Star Trek: the role of prior knowledge in
recognition revisited. Journal of Experimental Psychology. Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 28(6), 1073-1082. Retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pub
med/12450333.
Lupyan, G., Rakison, D., & McClelland, J. L. (2007). Language is not just for talking:
Redundant labels facilitate learning of novel categories. Psychological Science, 18
(12), 1077-1083. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9280.2007.02028.x.
Macmillan, N. A., & Creelman, C. D. (1990). Response Bias: Characteristics of Detection
Theory, Threshold Theory, and "Nonparametric" Indexes. Psychological Bulletin, 107
(3), 401-413. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.107.3.401.
Masson, M. E., & McDaniel, M. A. (1981). The role of organizational processes in longterm retention. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Learning & Memory, 7(2),
100-110. https://doi.org/10.1037/0278-7393.7.2.100.
Mathy, F., & Feldman, J. (2012). What's magic about magic numbers? Chunking and
data compression in short-term memory. Cognition, 122(3), 346-362. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.cognition.2011.11.003.
McClelland, J. L. (2013). Incorporating rapid neocortical learning of new schemaconsistent information into complementary learning systems theory. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 142(4), 1190-1210. https://doi.org/10.1037/
a0033812.
McClelland, J. L., McNaughton, B. L., & O'Reilly, R. C. (1995). Why there are
complementary learning systems in the hippocampus and neocortex: Insights from
the successes and failures of connectionist models of learning and memory.
Psychological Review, 102(3), 419-457. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033295X.102.3.419.
Melo, B., Winocur, G., & Moscovitch, M. (1999). False recall and false recognition: An
examination of the effects of selective and combined lesions to the medial temporal
lobe/diencephalon and frontal lobe structures. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 16(3-5),
343-359. https://doi.org/10.1080/026432999380825.
Mickes, L., Wais, P. E., & Wixted, J. T. (2009). Recollection Is a Continuous Process.
Psychological Science, 20(4), 509-515. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.14679280.2009.02324.x.
Migo, E. M., Mayes, A. R., & Montaldi, D. (2012). Measuring recollection and familiarity:
Improving the remember/know procedure. Consciousness and Cognition, 21(3),
1435-1455. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2012.04.014.
Miller, G. A. (1956). The magical number seven, plus or minus two: Some limits on our
capacity for processing information. The Psychological Review, 63(2), 81-97. https://
doi.org/10.1177/001088049003100202.
Moran, R., & Goshen-Gottstein, Y. (2015). Old processes, new perspectives: Familiarity is
correlated with (not independent of) recollection and is more (not equally) variable
for targets than for lures. Cognitive Psychology, 79, 40-67. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cogpsych.2015.01.005.
Mulligan, N. W. (2011). Generation disrupts memory for intrinsic context but not
extrinsic context. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 64(8), 1543-1562.
https://doi.org/10.1080/17470218.2011.562980.
Mulligan, N. W., Lozito, J. P., & Rosner, Z. A. (2006). Generation and context memory.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning Memory and Cognition, 32(4), 836-846.
https://doi.org/10.1037/0278-7393.32.4.836.
Myles-Worsley, M., Johnston, W. A., & Simons, M. A. (1988). The Influence of Expertise
on X-Ray Image Processing. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 14(3), 553-557. https://doi.org/10.1037/0278-7393.14.3.553.
Nassar, M. R., Helmers, J. C., & Frank, M. J. (2018). Chunking as a rational strategy for
lossy data compression in visual working memory. Psychological Review, 125(4),
486-511. https://doi.org/10.1037/rev0000101.
Norris, D. G., & Kalm, K. (2018). What's in a chunk? Chunking and data compression in
verbal short-term memory. https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/2st4j.
Popov, V., & Reder, L. M. (2020). Frequency effects on memory: A resource-limited
theory. Psychological Review, 127(1), 1-46. https://doi.org/10.1037/rev0000161.
Poppenk, J., Kohler, S., & Moscovitch, M. (2010). Revisiting the novelty effect: When
familiarity, not novelty, enhances memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 36(5), 1321-1330. https://doi.org/10.1037/
a0019900.
Poppenk, J., Moscovitch, M., & McIntosh, A. R. (2016). fMRI evidence of equivalent
neural suppression by repetition and prior knowledge. Neuropsychologia, 90,
159-169. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2016.06.034.
R Core Team. (2020). R: A language and environment for statistical computing, reference
index version 3.0.2. Retrieved from https://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.html.

Craik, F. I., & Tulving, E. (1975). Depth of Processing and the Retention of Words in
Episodic Memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 104(3), 268-294. https://doi.
org/10.1037//0096-3445.104.3.268.
Craik, F., & Lockhart, R. (1972). Levels of processing: A framework for memory research.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 684, 671-684. Retrieved from
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S002253717280001X.
Curby, K. M., & Gauthier, I. (2007). A visual short-term memory advantage for faces.
Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 14(4), 620-628. https://doi.org/10.3758/
BF03196811.
Curby, K. M., Glazek, K., & Gauthier, I. (2009). A Visual Short-Term Memory Advantage
for Objects of Expertise. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 35(1), 94-107. https://doi.org/10.1037/0096-1523.35.1.94.
de Groot, A. (1965). Thought and Choice in Chess. The Hague: Mouton. Retrieved from
https://en.aup.nl/books/9789053569986-thought-and-choice-in-chess.html.
DeWitt, M. R., Knight, J. B., Hicks, J. L., & Ball, B. H. (2012). The effects of prior
knowledge on the encoding of episodic contextual details. Psychonomic Bulletin and
Review, 19(2), 251-257. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-011-0196-4.
Diana, R. A., & Reder, L. M. (2006). The low-frequency encoding disadvantage: Word
frequency affects processing demands. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning
Memory and Cognition, 32(4), 805-815. https://doi.org/10.1037/02787393.32.4.805.
Diana, R. A., Reder, L. M., Arndt, J., & Park, H. (2006). Models of recognition: A review
of arguments in favor of a dual-process account. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 13
(1), 1-21. https://doi.org/10.3758/BF03193807.
Dudai, Y., Karni, A., & Born, J. (2015). The Consolidation and Transformation of
Memory. Neuron, 88(1), 20-32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2015.09.004.
Ecker, U. K. H., Zimmer, H. D., & Groh-Bordin, C. (2007a). Color and context: An ERP
study on intrinsic and extrinsic feature binding in episodic memory. Memory and
Cognition, 35(6), 1483-1501. https://doi.org/10.3758/BF03193618.
Ecker, U. K. H., Zimmer, H. D., & Groh-Bordin, C. (2007b). The influence of object and
background color manipulations on the electrophysiological indices of recognition
memory. Brain Research, 1185(1), 221-230. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
brainres.2007.09.047.
Engle, R. W., & Bukstel, L. (1978). Memory Processes among Bridge Players of Differing
Expertise. The American Journal of Psychology, 91(4), 673. https://doi.org/10.2307/
1421515.
Evans, K. K., Cohen, M. A., Tambouret, R., Horowitz, T., Kreindel, E., & Wolfe, J. M.
(2011). Does visual expertise improve visual recognition memory? Attention,
Perception, and Psychophysics, 73(1), 30-35. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13414-0100022-5.
Faul, F., Erdfelder, E., Lang, A. G., & Buchner, A. (2007). G*Power 3: A flexible statistical
power analysis program for the social, behavioral, and biomedical sciences. In
Behavior Research Methods (Vol. 39, pp. 175-191). Psychonomic Society Inc.
https://doi.org/10.3758/BF03193146.
Ghosh, V. E., & Gilboa, A. (2014). What is a memory schema? A historical perspective on
current neuroscience literature. Neuropsychologia, 53, 104-114. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2013.11.010.
Gilboa, A., & Marlatte, H. (2017). Neurobiology of Schemas and Schema-Mediated
Memory. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 21(8), 618-631. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
tics.2017.04.013.
Gobbini, M. I., & Haxby, J. V. (2007). Neural systems for recognition of familiar faces.
Neuropsychologia, 45(1), 32-41. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
neuropsychologia.2006.04.015.
Gobet, F., Lane, P., Crocker, S., Cheng, P., Jones, G., Oliver, I., & Pine, J. (2001).
Chunking mechanisms in human learning. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 5(6),
236-243. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1364-6613(00)01662-4.
Gobet, Fernand, & Simon, H. A. (1998). Expert Chess Memory: Revisiting the Chunking
Hypothesis. Memory, 6(3), 225-255. https://doi.org/10.1080/741942359.
Goldin, S. E. (1979). Recognition Memory for Chess Positions: Some Preliminary
Research. The American Journal of Psychology, 92(1), 19. https://doi.org/10.2307/
1421476.
Goldstein, A. G., & Chance, J. E. (1980). Memory for faces and schema theory. Journal of
Psychology: Interdisciplinary and Applied, 105(1), 47-59. https://doi.org/10.1080/
00223980.1980.9915131.
Horry, R., Wright, D. B., & Tredoux, C. G. (2010). Recognition and context memory for
faces from own and other ethnic groups: A remember-know investigation. Memory &
Cognition, 38(2), 134-141. https://doi.org/10.3758/MC.38.2.134.
Jackson, M. C., & Raymond, J. E. (2008). Familiarity Enhances Visual Working Memory
for Faces. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 34
(3), 556-568. https://doi.org/10.1037/0096-1523.34.3.556.
Jacoby, L. L., Shimizu, Y., Daniels, K. A., & Rhodes, M. G. (2005). Modes of cognitive
control in recognition and source memory: Depth of retrieval. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 12(5), 852-857. https://doi.org/10.3758/BF03196776.
Kawamura, S., Suzuki, S., & Morikawa, K. (2007). Short report: The effect of expertise in
hiking on recognition memory for mountain scenes. Memory, 15(7), 768-775.
https://doi.org/10.1080/09658210701582315.
Kirwan, C. B., & Stark, C. E. L. (2007). Overcoming interference: An fMRI investigation of
pattern separation in the medial temporal lobe. Learning and Memory, 14(9),
625-633. https://doi.org/10.1101/lm.663507.
Kitamura, T., Ogawa, S., Roy, D., Okuyama, T., Morrissey, M., Smith, L., ... Tonegawa, S.
(2017). Engrams and circuits crucial for systems consolidation of a memory. Science,
356(6333), 73-78. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aam6808.
Klatzky, R., & Forrest, F. (1984). Recognizing familiar and unfamiliar faces. Memory &
Cognition, 12(1), 60-70.

17

B. Bellana et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 121 (2021) 104264
Stangor, C., & Mcmillan, D. (1992). Memory for Expectancy-Congruent and ExpectancyIncongruent Information: A Review of the Social and Social Developmental
Literatures. Psychological Bulletin (Vol. Ill).
Stark, S. M., Yassa, M. A., Lacy, J. W., & Stark, C. E. L. (2013). A task to assess behavioral
pattern separation (BPS) in humans: Data from healthy aging and mild cognitive
impairment. Neuropsychologia, 51(12), 2442-2449. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
neuropsychologia.2012.12.014.
Troyer, A. K., Winocur, G., Craik, F. I. M., & Moscovitch, M. (1999). Source memory and
divided attention: Reciprocal costs to primary and secondary tasks. Neuropsychology,
13(4), 467-474.
Tse, D., Langston, R. F., Kakeyama, M., Bethus, I., Spooner, P. A., Wood, E. R., ...
Morris, R. G. M. (2007). Schemas and Memory Consolidation. Science, 316(7489),
76-82. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1135935.
Tulving, E. (1985). Memory and consciousness. Canadian Psychology/Psychologie
Canadienne, 26(1), 1-12. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0080017.
van Kesteren, M. R., Ruiter, D. J., Fernandez, G., & Henson, R. N. (2012). How schema
and novelty augment memory formation. Trends in Neurosciences, 35(4), 211-219.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tins.2012.02.001.
van Kesteren, M., Rijpkema, M., Ruiter, D. J., Morris, R. G. M., & Fernandez, G. (2014).
Building on prior knowledge: Schema-dependent encoding processes relate to
academic performance. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 26(10), 2250-2261.
https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn.
van Kesteren, M. T. R., Rijpkema, M., & Ruiter, D. J. (2010). Retrieval of Associative
Information Congruent with Prior Knowledge Is Related to Increased Medial
Prefrontal Activity and Connectivity, 30(47), 15888-15894. https://doi.org/
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2674-10.2010.
Warren, D. E., Jones, S. H., Duff, M. C., & Tranel, D. (2014). False recall is reduced by
damage to the ventromedial prefrontal cortex: Implications for understanding the
neural correlates of schematic memory. Journal of Neuroscience, 34(22), 7677-7682.
https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0119-14.2014.
Wattenmaker, W. D. (1999). The influence of prior knowledge in intentional versus
incidental concept learning. Memory & Cognition, 27(4), 685-698. Retrieved from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10479827.
Willenbockel, V., Sadr, J., Fiset, D., Horne, G. O., Gosselin, F., & Tanaka, J. W. (2010).
Controlling low-level image properties: The SHINE toolbox. Behavior Research
Methods, 42(3), 671-684. https://doi.org/10.3758/brm.42.3.671.
Wixted, J. T. (2007). Dual-process theory and signal-detection theory of recognition
memory. Psychological Review, 114(1), 152-176. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033295X.114.1.152.
Wixted, J. T., & Stretch, V. (2004). In defense of the signal detection interpretation of
remember/know judgments. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 11(4), 616-641.
https://doi.org/10.3758/BF03196616.
Yarmey, A. D. (1971). Recognition memory for familiar "public" faces: Effects of
orientation and delay. Psychonomic Science, 24(6), 286-288. https://doi.org/
10.3758/BF03329007.
Yonelinas, A. P. (2002). The nature of recollection and familiarity: A review of 30 years
of research. Journal of Memory and Language, 46(3), 441-517. https://doi.org/
10.1006/jmla.2002.2864.
Yonelinas, A. P., Aly, M., Wang, W. C., & Koen, J. D. (2010). Recollection and familiarity:
Examining controversial assumptions and new directions. Hippocampus, 20(11),
1178-1194. https://doi.org/10.1002/hipo.20864.

Reder, L. M., Victoria, L. W., Manelis, A., Oates, J. M., Dutcher, J. M., Bates, J. T., ...
Gyulai, F. (2013). Why It's Easier to Remember Seeing a Face We Already Know
Than One We Don't: Preexisting Memory Representations Facilitate Memory
Formation. Psychological Science, 24(3), 363-372. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0956797612457396.
Reder, Lynne M, Liu, X. L., Keinath, A., & Popov, V. (2016). Building knowledge requires
bricks, not sand: The critical role of familiar constituents in learning. Psychonomic
Bulletin and Review, 23(1), 271-277. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-015-0889-1.
Roediger, H. L., & McDermott, K. B. (1995). Creating False Memories: Remembering
Words Not Presented in Lists. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 21(4), 803-814. https://doi.org/10.1037/0278-7393.21.4.803.
Rojahn, K., & Pettigrew, T. F. (1992). Memory for schema-relevant information: A metaanalytic resolution. British Journal of Social Psychology, 31(2), 81-109. https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.2044-8309.1992.tb00958.x.
Sayood, K. (2003). Data Compression. In Encyclopedia of Information Systems (pp.
423-444). Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/B0-12-227240-4/00029-0.
Scapinello, K. F., & Yarmey, A. D. (1970). The role of familiarity and orientation in
immediate and delayed recognition of pictorial stimuli. Psychonomic Science, 21(6),
329-330. https://doi.org/10.3758/BF03335807.
Schacter, D. L., Guerin, S. a, & St Jacques, P. L. (2011). Memory distortion: an adaptive
perspective. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 15(10), 467-474. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.tics.2011.08.004.
Schwartz, L., & Yovel, G. (2016). The roles of perceptual and conceptual information in
face recognition. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 145(11), 1493-1511.
https://doi.org/10.1037/xge0000220.
Schwartz, L., & Yovel, G. (2019). Learning faces as concepts rather than percepts
improves face recognition. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 45(10), 1733-1747. https://doi.org/10.1037/xlm0000673.
Scolari, M., Vogel, E. K., & Awh, E. (2008). Perceptual expertise enhances the resolution
but not the number of representations in working memory. Psychonomic Bulletin and
Review, 15(1), 215-222. https://doi.org/10.3758/PBR.15.1.215.
Sekeres, M. J., Bonasia, K., St-laurent, M., Pishdadian, S., Winocur, G., Grady, C., &
Moscovitch, M. (2016). Recovering and preventing loss of detailed memory :
Differential rates of forgetting for detail types in episodic memory. Learning &
Memory (Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y.), 23(February), 72-82. https://doi.org/10.1101/
lm.039057.115.
Sharon, T., Moscovitch, M., & Gilboa, A. (2011). Rapid neocortical acquisition of longterm arbitrary associations independent of the hippocampus. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 108(3), 1146-1151.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1005238108.
Shen, Z., Popov, V., Delahay, A. B., & Reder, L. M. (2018). Item strength affects working
memory capacity. Memory and Cognition, 46(2), 204-215. https://doi.org/10.3758/
s13421-017-0758-4.
Slotnick, S. D. (2010). "Remember" source memory ROCs indicate recollection is a
continuous process. Memory, 18(1), 27-39. https://doi.org/10.1080/
09658210903390061.
Slotnick, S. D., Jeye, B. M., & Dodson, C. S. (2016). Recollection is a continuous process:
Evidence from plurality memory receiver operating characteristics. Memory, 24(1),
2-11. https://doi.org/10.1080/09658211.2014.971033.
Spencer, W., & Raz, N. (1995). Differential effects of aging on memory for content and
context: A meta-analysis. Psychology and Aging, 10(4), 527-539. Retrieved from
http://psycnet.apa.org/journals/pag/10/4/527/.

18

