Bilingualism: Language and
Cognition
cambridge.org/bil

Understanding semantic accents in
Japanese-English bilinguals: A
feature-based approach
Eriko Matsuki1, Yasushi Hino2 and Debra Jared1

Research Article
Cite this article: Matsuki E, Hino Y, Jared D
(2021). Understanding semantic accents in
Japanese-English bilinguals: A feature-based
approach. Bilingualism: Language and
Cognition 24, 137-153. https://doi.org/10.1017/
S1366728920000322
Received: 15 July 2019
Revised: 7 April 2020
Accepted: 15 April 2020
First published online: 13 May 2020
Keywords:
bilinguals; semantic accent; semantic features;
conceptual representations; Japanese-English
Address for correspondence:
Debra Jared,
E-mail: djjared@uwo.ca

1
Department of Psychology, The Brain and Mind Institute, Western Interdisciplinary Research Building, University
of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada N6A 3K7 and 2Waseda University

Abstract
A bilingual exhibits a "semantic accent" when they comprehend or use a word in one language
in a way that is influenced by its translation. Semantic accents are well-captured by featurebased models: however, few studies have specifically examined the processing of features
that contribute to a semantic accent. Japanese-English bilinguals and monolinguals of each
language completed three feature-based tasks focusing on culture-specific semantic features.
Bilinguals exhibited semantic accents in L1 and L2 in that they had stronger associations
than monolinguals between the features specific to one culture and words in the other
language. Within bilinguals, culture-specific features were more strongly associated with the
congruent language than the incongruent language. Finally, changes in the strengths of associations between culture-specific features and words depended more on L2 cultural immersion
than L2 proficiency. Semantic accents lessened in L2 and increased in L1 after many years of
exposure to the L2 culture.

Introduction

(c) The Author(s), 2020. Published by
Cambridge University Press

When we listen to someone speaking in their second language (L2), we can often detect an
accent: that is, we can hear an influence of their first language (L1) on their L2 speech. The
most obvious influence is in the sounds of words, but sometimes grammatical errors are
made in L2 that are influenced by the L1 grammar. Less obviously, bilinguals can also exhibit
accents in their use of lexical-conceptual knowledge. De Groot (2012, 2014) noted that a bilingual exhibits a semantic accent when they comprehend or use a word in one language in a way
that is influenced by knowledge of its translation. Semantic accents occur because a word in
one language often does not have a perfectly matching translation in another language
(Van Hell & De Groot, 1998). For example, the word ball in English is typically translated
as balle in French. The two words, however, do not refer to the same set of objects because
the word balle refers to small balls such as tennis balls, but not to basketballs or footballs
(Paradis, 1997). Thus, when English-French bilinguals use balle to refer to a soccer ball
with the assumption that the word means the same as ball, they are exhibiting a semantic
accent. Such differences between presumed translations can pose communication challenges.
If an L1 English child asks a French L1 speaker to bring a balle to the park, the ball that is
brought may be too small for an intended game of soccer.
Differences between translations in underlying conceptual representations can also come
from contextual circumstances, especially when the two languages are learned in different cultures (Athanasopoulos, 2015; Lupyan & Lewis, 2019; Masuda, Ishii, Miwa, Rashid, Lee &
Mahdi, 2017; Jared, Poh & Paivio, 2013; Pavlenko, 2009). For example, the English word
pumpkin is translated as kabocha in Japanese, but the actual objects look and are used differently depending on cultural contexts. In North America, pumpkins are typically orange and
used for carving jack o'lanterns whereas typical pumpkins in Japan have green skins and
are eaten as a vegetable. Such cultural differences raise the possibility that bilinguals develop
different lexical-conceptual representations depending on where they learn and use their
languages.
The present study investigated how Japanese-English bilinguals represent and process
translation word pairs that do not convey identical conceptual information, and on changes
that may occur with increasing proficiency and L2 cultural exposure. We take a conceptual
feature-based approach. The novel aspect of our work is that we focus on specific features
that may be differentially associated with conceptual representations for translations in a bilingual's two languages using feature-typicality ratings, and feature-verification and featurepriming tasks. Before presenting our study we first briefly review feature theories of conceptual
representation, particularly those that have considered how a bilingual might represent translation words that are not entirely equivalent.

138

Eriko Matsuki, Yasushi Hino and Debra Jared

Fig. 1. The Shared (Distributed) Asymmetrical (SDA)
model. The SDA model proposes that conceptual
representations differ in L1 and L2 depending on L2
proficiency. Adapted from Dong, Y., Gui, S. and
MacWhinney, B. (2005), Shared and separate meanings in the bilingual mental lexicon, Bilingualism:
Language & Cognition, 8, 221-238, Figure 9, p. 233.

The Distributed Conceptual Feature model
A prominent view in the research on conceptual knowledge
representation in monolinguals is that the meaning of words is
represented, at least partially, in terms of semantic features (e.g.,
"barks" for dog), and studies have shown the usefulness of features
in explaining various behavioural and neuropsychological phenomena (e.g., Barsalou, 1982; Collins & Quillian, 1969; McRae, de Sa
& Seidenberg, 1997; Norman & Rumelhart, 1975; Rogers &
McClelland, 2004). Adopting this notion of feature-based representation of concepts from the monolingual literature, De Groot and
colleagues (De Groot, 1992; Kroll & De Groot, 1997; Van Hell &
De Groot, 1998) proposed the Distributed Conceptual Feature
(DCF) model of bilingual conceptual representation. According
to this model, conceptual information is stored in terms of feature
units, and those feature units are connected to word forms for each
language. Because translations (e.g., dog in English and chien in
French) typically convey comparable meanings, they are assumed
to activate mostly the same feature units (e.g., has four legs,
barks, etc.). The subtle differences in meanings between translations are assumed to be reflected in the unique features that each
word activates. That is, features provide a way to describe the
part of conceptual representations that may differ across languages
or cultural contexts. For example, concrete words are assumed to
share more conceptual features across translations than abstract
words, an assumption that can account for findings such as stronger cross-language priming effects for concrete than for abstract
words (e.g., Jin, 1990), and more word associations that are translations for concrete than abstract translation pairs (Van Hell & De
Groot, 1998). De Groot (2011) reviews other evidence from word
studies that support the DCF model.
The DCF model can also provide an account of results from
bilingual object naming studies (e.g., Ameel, Storms, Malt &
Sloman, 2005; Malt, Li, Pavlenko, Zhu & Ameel, 2015; Malt
& Sloman 2003; Pavlenko & Malt, 2011; Zinszer, Malt, Ameel
& Li, 2014). For example, Ameel et al. asked Dutch-French simultaneous bilinguals to name images of containers. Some of the
containers used in the study are usually given different names
by French monolinguals (e.g., bouteille or flacon, depending on
size), but the same name by Dutch monolinguals (e.g., fles).
Ameel et al. observed that bilinguals' naming patterns for their
two languages were more similar compared to the naming patterns observed in monolinguals of each language. Thus, bilinguals
may use bouteille for both the bouteille and the flacon when naming in French, suggesting that they verbally categorize them more
similarly than French monolinguals. Such findings are not limited
to simultaneous bilinguals. Malt et al. (2015) tested late
Mandarin-English bilinguals living in the U. S. and also found

that naming patterns for household objects differed from both
native speakers of English and native speakers of Mandarin.
The researchers hypothesized that the reason bilinguals' naming
patterns converge across languages is that their lexical-conceptual
representations were simplified, either by dropping language-specific features or generalizing those features to both languages. We
are unaware, however, of any studies that have empirically tested
this claim by focusing on individual features that may be generalized or dropped in the process of becoming bilingual.

The Shared Distributed Asymmetrical model
The Shared (Distributed) Asymmetrical (SDA) model (Dong, Gui
& MacWhinney, 2005) builds on the insights of the DCF model
(see Figure 1). As in the DCF, translations can have links to
both shared and language-specific conceptual elements. The
SDA model goes further in providing an account of how L2 proficiency influences the connection strengths between words and
conceptual elements. More specifically, the model assumes that
bilinguals with low L2 proficiency acquire a new L2 word by
developing connections to the conceptual elements of the translations in their L1 (see also Jiang, 2002; Pavlenko, 2005, 2009). For
example, Japanese-English bilinguals may learn the word pumpkin assuming that it conveys the same semantic information as the
Japanese kabocha: that is, a round vegetable with green skin. This
produces a semantic accent in their L2 because the word pumpkin
would activate the L1-specific element "is green". This overextension of L1-specific elements to L2 words is similar to one of the
mechanisms of semantic convergence discussed in Ameel et al.
(2005). However, the proposal of the SDA model differs in that
the semantic representations activated by the L2 word are initially
solely based on knowledge from L1.
The SDA model further proposes that as L2 proficiency develops, bilinguals form connections between L2 words and L2-specific
conceptual elements, and weaken the connections between L2
words and L1-specific elements, lessening their semantic accent
in L2. These processes lead bilinguals to have somewhat different
conceptual representations for translations. However, the SDA
model also proposes that the acquisition of L2-specific elements
can result in bilinguals developing connections between L1
words and L2 elements (e.g., kabocha, used for carving jack o'lanterns), producing a semantic accent in L1. Such connections produce semantic convergence in bilinguals, where the meanings
activated by kabocha and pumpkin are more similar compared to
those activated by monolinguals of each language. That is, Dong
et al. suggest that there are mechanisms that produce both convergence and divergence of the representations activated by

Bilingualism: Language and Cognition

translations. While these mechanisms can also be accommodated
in the DCF model, an advantage of the SDA model is that it
makes specific predictions about how bilingual conceptual representations change with increasing proficiency.
Dong et al. (2005) tested their model by asking participants to
rank the semantic similarity between a word (e.g., red) and eight
other words (e.g., debt, bride, color). Some of the relations were
culturally-specific (e.g., red and bride are related in a Chinese context because a red wedding dress is common in China but not in
North America). The task was completed by Chinese-English
bilinguals who varied in English proficiency, as well as by
Chinese and English monolinguals. When the task was completed
in English, the ranking pattern of the less-proficient bilinguals
deviated more from English monolinguals than did the ranking
pattern of the more-proficient bilinguals. The researchers argued
that this difference supports the idea that low-proficiency bilinguals have less English monolingual-like conceptual representations because they are more dependent on their L1 knowledge.
On the other hand, when the task was done in Chinese, the ranking pattern of the high-proficiency bilinguals deviated from
Chinese monolinguals more than that of low-proficiency bilinguals. The researchers explained that this occurred due to the
influence from the acquisition of L2 conceptual elements. That
is, L2 conceptual elements not only connected to L2 words, but
they also developed links to L1 words. These findings suggest
that less-proficient bilinguals have stronger semantic accents in
their L2 compared to more-proficient bilinguals, while moreproficient bilinguals have stronger semantic accents in their L1
compared to less-proficient bilinguals.
Further research examining translation-nonequivalence at the
feature level is needed not only to test the predictions of the
SDA, but also to provide data for the development of computational models of bilingual word processing. Dijkstra et al.'s
(Dijkstra, Wahl, Buytenhuijs, Van Halem, Al-Jibouri, De Korte
& Rekke, 2019) recent model of word translation, Multilink,
assumes equivalent meanings for translations, and they acknowledge that this is a simplification that needs to be addressed in
future simulation work.
The present study
We investigated semantic accents in Japanese-English bilinguals
by probing individual features that are likely to be responsible
for those accents. Our study differs, therefore, from previous studies of semantic accents that have examined patterns of naming
responses for pictured objects. A key assumption of the featurebased bilingual models is that the conceptual differences in translations can be described in terms of language- or culture-specific
features. Semantic accents in bilinguals can be considered to
emerge from the activation of such features when they are using
the other language. Tasks that tap into semantic features specifically may, therefore, be useful tools to investigate the nature of
semantic accents. Three feature tasks that have been used in the
monolingual literature were selected for use here: a featuretypicality rating task, a feature-verification task, and featurepriming lexical decision task. These tasks vary in the extent to
which they require an explicit judgment of the relation between
a word and a feature. The critical features were culture-specific
features that were either perceptual or situational features. In
the monolingual literature, it has been suggested that the kind
of feature influences how people recognize concepts (e.g., Cree,
McNorgan & McRae, 2006; Solomon & Barsalou, 2001). In

139

bilinguals, the type of feature may affect how easily it can be
acquired when learning a word meaning. A perceptual
feature may be readily learned by observing the object in the
new culture, but situational information may require deeper cultural knowledge.
Bilinguals performed the three feature tasks in both English
and Japanese; the tasks were also completed by monolinguals of
each language. The study addressed three main questions. One
was whether the bilinguals in our study exhibited a semantic
accent in either L2 or L1. In particular, we examined whether
Japanese-specific cultural features are associated with representations of English words to a greater extent for Japanese-English
bilinguals than for English monolinguals, and whether
Canadian-specific cultural features are associated with representations of Japanese words to a greater extent for Japanese-English
bilinguals than for Japanese monolinguals. The DCM and SDA
models presume that such is the case for semantic accents, but
no study has examined this assumption at the level of features,
as far as we are aware. Although it would not be particularly surprising to find that L1 Japanese-specific conceptual features are
associated with L2 English words, it is much less clear whether
Canadian-specific features become associated with the much
more entrenched Japanese L1, as Dong et al. (2005) propose.
Some evidence that L1 lexical-conceptual representations are
modified when L2 is learned comes from the previously mentioned Malt et al. (2015) object naming study with late bilinguals.
The second question was whether bilinguals perform differently depending on the language in which they completed the
task: that is, whether they have symmetric or asymmetric lexical
connections. If bilinguals' semantic accents arise because their
conceptual representations have converged across languages,
then culture-specific features should be as strongly associated
with a word in one language as with its translation in the other
language, either because bilinguals have dropped languagespecific features or have generalized those features to both languages. As noted, Ameel et al. (2005) found evidence for converging conceptual representations in simultaneous Dutch-French
bilinguals. In contrast, if the conceptual representations that are
activated by words in each language are somewhat different,
then culture-specific features should be more strongly associated
with the culturally-congruent language than the incongruent language. The latter finding would be consistent with two previous
studies in our lab. Using pictures of culturally-specific objects,
Jared et al. (2013) found that Chinese-English bilinguals' naming
times were faster when the language of the task and the culture of
the picture matched than when they mismatched. A congruency
effect was also observed for similar bilinguals in a subsequent
word-picture matching study in both decision latency and ERP
data (Pan, Xiong, Jouravlev & Jared, in press). These studies provide evidence that bilinguals who have learned each of their languages in quite different cultural contexts may activate somewhat
different conceptual representations from words that are translations of one another. The current study extends this previous
research by focusing in on culture-specific features rather than
on images of whole objects.
The third question that we addressed was whether the SDA's
developmental account is accurate. This view predicts that, as
proficiency in English increases, we should see weaker associations of Japanese-specific features and stronger association of
Canadian-specific features with English words, and that we
should also see a stronger association of Canadian-specific features with Japanese words. Proficiency was assessed using a

140

vocabulary test, and this hypothesis was examined by comparing
bilinguals with different scores on the test. These analyses can
not only provide evidence concerning whether the general pattern of results is consistent with the SDA, but they also provide
some insight into just how much proficiency it takes for such
patterns to emerge.
However, proficiency may not be the main driver of conceptual change in bilinguals. Several studies have provided evidence
that immersion in an L2-speaking country facilitates the development of native-like conceptual representations (e.g., Malt, 2019;
Malt & Sloman, 2003; Mok & Yu, 2016; Pavlenko & Malt,
2011; Zinszer et al., 2014). For example, Mandarin learners of
L2 English who were immersed in an English environment
showed household object (Zinszer et al., 2014) and verb (Malt,
2019) naming patterns that were more similar to native English
speakers than those who were learning in classrooms in China.
Furthermore, Malt and Sloman (2003) found that bilinguals'
naming patterns for household objects in L2 diverged less from
those of native speakers as the number of years of immersion in
an L2-speaking country increased, but the number of years of
classroom instruction did not show such a relationship. Even
the group with more than 10 years of L2 immersion still differed
from native speakers, indicating that developing native-like
lexical-conceptual representations can be a long process. This
research suggests that it is possible that the SDA's developmental
account is broadly correct, but that years of immersion in an L2
speaking country rather than proficiency may be more strongly
associated with conceptual change. Therefore, we also investigated
the influence of length of residence in English-speaking countries
on the strength of the association between culture-specific features
and words in English and Japanese.
In summary, the current study extends previous research on
semantic accents by probing specific features that are likely to
contribute to semantic accents. Furthermore, much of the
research has focused on lexical-conceptual representations for
household objects. Here we included a large range of items.
Method
Participants
Bilinguals
Ninety-nine Japanese-English bilingual participants were recruited
(37 male, mean age = 28.1 years); 49 were recruited in Tokyo and
50 were recruited in London and Toronto, Canada. The bilinguals
were recruited in Japan and Canada to obtain participants with different amounts of L2 cultural exposure. The number of years residing in English-speaking countries ranged from 0-22 years (mean
= 7.7 years, SD = 8.9). Participants' L1 was Japanese and they had
good English proficiency. Participants in Japan were required to
have a score of 700 or higher on the Test of English for
International Communication (TOEIC). The participants recruited
in Canada received $15 for each session and those recruited in
Japan received a book card of similar value. Ninety-four participants completed both English and Japanese sessions as planned,
but five participants were available only for one session (three
did not do the English session and two missed the Japanese
session).
English monolinguals
Forty-eight English speakers (12 male, mean age = 19.4 years)
were recruited at Western University. All were born in Canada

Eriko Matsuki, Yasushi Hino and Debra Jared

and had English as their L1. Their knowledge of a second language was minimal. The participants received course credit.
Japanese monolinguals
Forty-four Japanese monolinguals (16 male, mean age = 19.5
years) were recruited at Waseda University. All were born in
Japan and had Japanese as their L1. They had at least some
knowledge of English, because English is a part of compulsory
education in Japan. However, none met the bilingual criterion
on the TOEIC.

Materials
Stimuli
Both English and Japanese versions (translations) of the
stimuli were developed. The critical stimuli consisted of 120
culture-specific word and feature pairs (see Appendix).
One challenge in testing feature-based models of conceptual
representations in bilinguals is the difficulty in identifying
language- or culture-specific features. The process of developing the stimuli involved first asking Japanese and Canadian
participants to generate features for lists of words (see
Matsuki, 2018). To select the set of stimuli that were used in
the research, a further pilot study was conducted in which
feature-typicality ratings were collected for 200 pairs of
words and features from Japanese- and English-speaking participants. The pilot study had 80 items that each had a corresponding feature that was judged by the experimenters to be
prevalent in Canada but not in Japan and 90 items that
each had a feature that was judged to be prevalent in Japan
but not in Canada. Henceforth, these are referred to as
Canada-specific and Japan-specific features, respectively.
Although many of these features are also typical in other
countries, these terms were used here as a concise way to distinguish the culture of a feature (Japan) from the language in
which it was presented (Japanese). Thirty filler items were also
included to help detect whether participants were completing
the task carefully. Half were paired with highly typical features
and half with highly atypical features.
Pilot study participants were 20 Japanese speakers residing in
Japan (6 female, mean age = 38.2 years, SD = 10.51) and 25
English speakers residing in Canada (16 female, mean age =
40.2 years, SD = 15.18). All were recruited and tested via crowdsourcing websites (Lancers for Japanese speakers, CrowdFlower
for English speakers). Participants were asked to rate the typicality
of each pair of words and features on a 1 (not typical at all) to
7 (very typical) scale. For Canadian participants, the word-feature
pairs were given in English, and for Japanese participants,
the same word-feature pairs were presented in Japanese.
Participants were paid $3 or 270 yen.
Using these ratings, 60 Japan-specific word-feature pairs and
60 Canada-specific word-feature pairs were selected. Half of
each had a culture-specific perceptual feature and half had a
culture-specific situational feature. Canadian participants rated
the Canada-specific items higher (perceptual: M = 5.4, SD = 0.7,
situational: M = 5.8, SD = 0.6) compared to Japanese participants
(perceptual: M = 3.3, SD = 1.0, situational: M = 3.5, SD = 1.0),
whereas Japanese participants rated the Japan-specific items
higher (perceptual: M = 5.33, SD = .75, situational: M = 5.39,
SD = .89) compared to Canadian participants (perceptual: M =
2.95, SD = 1.00, situational: M = 3.09, SD = 1.21).

Bilingualism: Language and Cognition

141

Table 1. Mean Word Length and Frequency (per million) of Stimuli in the Lexical Decision Task (SD in parentheses)
English
Characteristic
Length
Frequency

Japanese

Target

Prime

Target

Prime

6.7 (2.7)

7.2 (3.4)

2.8 (1.5)

2.9 (1.7)

31.9 (83.2)

41.3 (71.8)

19.2 (55.7)

16.3 (28.2)

Feature-typicality rating and feature-verification tasks
For these tasks, 60 culture-neutral word-feature pairs were
included with the 120 critical pairs. Thirty of these filler pairs
were highly typical (e.g., SNOW-is cold) and the other 30 filler
pairs were not typical (e.g., BALL-is square).

Feature-priming lexical decision task
Critical words (e.g., BROOM) were used as the targets and shortened forms of the features (e.g., made of bamboo to bamboo)
were used as primes. Table 1 reports the mean length and frequency of the primes and targets. Word frequency was obtained
from SUBTLEX (Brysbaert & New, 2009) for English and the
NTT database (Amano & Kondo, 2000) for Japanese. Unrelated
pairs were created by re-pairing each target with a feature from
another target. Two counterbalanced lists were created; each
had an equal number of related and unrelated trials, items with
Canada- and Japan-specific features, and perceptual features
and situational features. Each prime and target appeared only
once on a list.
Another 120 pairs of prime words and nonword targets were
developed for "NO" response filler trials. The English-like nonwords were selected from the English Lexicon Project database
(Balota, Yap, Cortese, Hutchison, Kessler, Loftis, Neely, Nelson,
Simpson & Treiman, 2007), and the Japanese-like nonwords
were created by changing the order of, or substituting, the characters of real words. Both the primes and their nonword targets
were matched in length to the primes and targets used for the critical trials. The same filler items were added to each list.

Vocabulary test
Japanese and English vocabulary tests were used to assess language proficiency. Each test had 40 words and 20 nonwords,
and the participants were asked to indicate if they were real
words or nonwords. Japanese words were taken from the NTT
vocabulary estimation test (Amano & Kondo, 2000), and the nonwords were created by reordering the characters of real Japanese
words. Both word and nonword items used for the English test
were taken from LexTale (Lemhofer & Broersma, 2012). These
tests were created on the Qualtrics platform and completed
using a computer. They were scored using the sensitivity index
(d') instead of percentage correct to take into account false alarms.

Procedure
Participants completed the language questionnaire, the vocabulary test, and then the three experimental tasks. To minimize
the influence of repeated exposure to the stimuli, participants
started from the implicit and time-sensitive task, the featurepriming task, followed by the feature-verification task, and then
the feature-typicality rating task. Each task had English and
Japanese versions. Monolinguals did the version appropriate for
their language (except that Japanese monolinguals also did the
English vocabulary test), whereas the bilingual participants were
asked to do both language versions, in different sessions at least
one week apart. Language order was counterbalanced across
participants.
For the feature-priming task, participants were asked to decide
whether a target word was a real word. First, a fixation point was
presented in the center of a computer monitor for 500 ms, followed by the prime (e.g., bamboo) for 200 ms. Finally, the target
(e.g., BROOM) was presented until the participant responded.
English words were presented in 12 pt Courier New font, with
the prime in lower case and the target in upper case. Japanese
stimuli were presented in 12 pt Mincho font. All participants
did 10 practice trials before the 240 experimental trials. The intertrial interval was 2 s. The order of stimuli was randomized for
each participant. The task was programmed using DMDX
(Forster & Forster, 2003).
In the feature-verification task, participants were asked to
determine whether a feature (e.g., made of bamboo) is reasonably
true for a given concept word (e.g., broom). On each trial, a fixation point was presented for 500 ms, followed by the feature,
which was presented for 1500 ms. Finally, the concept word was
presented until the participant made response. All participants
did 10 practice trials before the 180 experimental trials. Other
aspects of the procedure were the same as for the feature-priming
task.
In the feature-rating task, participants were asked to rate the
typicality of each of the pairs of words (e.g., broom) and features
(e.g., made of bamboo) using slider scales ranging from 0 (not
typical at all) to 100 (very typical). The order of stimuli was randomized for each participant. The task was created on the
Qualtrics platform and was completed using a computer.
Results
The descriptive data from the vocabulary tests are in Table 2.

Language questionnaire
Items were based on the LEAP-Questionnaire (Marian, Blumenfeld
& Kaushanskaya, 2007). English and Japanese versions were
created. Of particular importance was a question that asked participants to indicate the number of years they had lived in an
English-speaking country. This was the measure of L2 cultural
exposure.

Analysis overview
Words for which a bilingual participant did not give a typicality
rating (4.5% for English, 0.9% for Japanese) were assumed to be
unknown to the participant; data from those items were not
included in any analysis. Three different sets of analyses were

142

Eriko Matsuki, Yasushi Hino and Debra Jared

Table 2. English and Japanese Vocabulary Test Mean d' Scores (SD in
parentheses)
English

Japanese

English Monolinguals

2.69 (0.81)

n/a

Japanese Monolinguals

0.79 (0.44)

2.23 (0.47)

Bilinguals

1.24 (0.80)

1.91 (0.53)

conducted for each task. The first set involved comparisons of
bilinguals with monolinguals in each language to investigate
semantic accents. In these analyses, four English monolinguals
and three Japanese monolinguals were excluded due to high
error rates on the feature-priming task. The second set of analyses
involved comparisons across languages within the bilingual group
to investigate whether access to culture-specific features differs
depending on the language used for the task. Finally, the last set
of analyses explored whether bilinguals' access to culture-specific
features depends on individual differences, including L2 proficiency and L2 cultural exposure. Data from bilinguals who missed
a session were included where possible in the first and third analyses. The results are presented by research question, with each section including analyses of data from each of the experimental tasks.
This presentation order was used to avoid undue repetition of the
description of the analyses. The analyses for a particular question
were very similar across the tasks, but they were somewhat different
for the three questions. Furthermore, although participants performed the feature-priming task first, then the feature-verification
task, and lastly the typicality-rating task, the data from these
tasks are presented in reverse order in each section. The featurepriming task data are more complex than for the other two tasks
because of the additional variable of prime-target relation, and
we felt these analyses would be best understood if the simpler
analyses came first.
The data were analyzed using linear mixed models (RT and
rating data) or generalized linear mixed models (binary data)
within the lme4 package (Bates, Maechler, Bolker & Walker,
2015) of R (R Core Team, 2012). RT data were log transformed.
The function Anova in the car package version 2.1-2 (Fox &
Weisberg, 2011) was used to obtain the estimates and probability
values for the fixed effects that are reported in the text (Type II
Wald chi-square tests). Just the effects of interest are
reported in the text. Complete model outputs appear in the
Supplemental Materials, Appendices S1-S3.
Do the bilinguals have semantic accents in L1 and L2?
The analyses investigated whether there were any differences
between bilinguals and the monolinguals in each language, specifically whether participant Group interacts with Culture-Pair
and Feature-Type. Fixed factors included: Group (Monolingual
vs. Bilingual; sum coded), Culture-Pair (Canada-specific vs.
Japan-specific word-feature pairs; sum coded), Feature-Type
(Perceptual vs. Situational; sum coded), and their interaction
terms. The feature-priming task had the additional fixed factor
of prime-target Relation (Related vs. Unrelated). Random factors
included: subject (random intercept and random slope adjustment for Culture-Pair) and items (random intercept only).
Random effects here and elsewhere were determined by comparing models with different random structures and selecting the
one with the best fit.

Fig. 2. Mean typicality ratings on the English (top) and Japanese (bottom) versions of
the task.

Feature-typicality ratings
Mean typicality ratings on the English and Japanese versions of
the task are presented in Figure 2.

English
There was a significant interaction of Group x Culture-Pair,  2(1)
= 396.67, p < .001. Bilinguals gave lower ratings for pairs with
Canada-specific features and higher ratings for pairs with
Japan-specific features than did English monolinguals (t = 9.45,
p < .001, t = -12.64, p < .001, respectively). There was also a significant Group x Culture-Pair x Feature-Type interaction  2(1) =
23.02, p < .001. The difference between the bilinguals and
English monolinguals was particularly evident for pairs with
Japan-specific situational features.

Bilingualism: Language and Cognition

143

Fig. 3. Mean verification latencies (left) and rates (right) on the English (top) and Japanese (bottom) versions of the task.

Japanese
The Group x Culture-Pair interaction was again significant,
 2(1) = 32.48, p < .001. Post-hoc comparisons revealed that bilinguals gave higher ratings for pairs with Canada-specific features
than Japanese monolinguals, t = -5.00, p < .001, but both groups
gave similar ratings for pairs with Japan-specific features, t = 0.40,
p = .69. The Group x Culture-Pair x Feature-Type interaction was
not significant.
Feature-verification task
Mean verification latencies and rates for the English and Japanese
versions of the task are presented in Figure 3.
English
For the verification latency analyses, the NO responses (19.7% of
data across bilinguals and monolinguals) and then RT outliers

(residuals greater than 2.5 standard deviation in absolute values;
0.1% of data) were removed from the analyses. The Group x
Culture-Pair interaction was not significant,  2(1) = 0.68, p = .41.
There was, however, a significant Group x Culture-Pair x
Feature-Type interaction,  2(1) = 9.69, p < .01. Bilinguals had
slower verification latencies than English monolinguals, particularly for pairs with Japanese situational features, t = 2.06, p < .05.
For verification rates, there was significant Group x CulturePair interaction,  2(1) = 210.29, p < .001. Post-hoc comparisons
revealed that bilinguals' verification rates for pairs with
Canada-specific features were considerably lower than the verification rates of English monolinguals, t = 10.27, p < .001, and
their verification rates for pairs with Japan-specific features
were higher than those of English monolinguals, t = -2.31,
p < .05. The Group x Culture-Pair x Feature-Type interaction
was not significant.

144

Eriko Matsuki, Yasushi Hino and Debra Jared

Table 3. Mean Decision Latencies (ms) and Percentage Errors (in parentheses) on English and Japanese Versions of the Lexical Decision Task
Perceptual Features

Group & Culture Pair

Related

Unrelated

Situational Features
Priming
Effect

Related

Unrelated

Priming
Effect

Overall
Priming
Effect

English
Bilinguals
Canada

880 (9.8)

911 (10.4)

31 (0.6)

925 (14.4)

950 (15.3)

25 (0.9)

28 (0.7)

Japan

855 (5.3)

873 (6.9)

18 (1.6)

964 (12.7)

970 (14.0)

6 (1.3)

13 (1.5)

Canada

646 (2.4)

655 (5.3)

9 (2.9)

647 (2.9)

665 (5.0)

18 (2.1)

14 (2.5)

Japan

652 (4.3)

655 (5.0)

3 (0.7)

688 (6.7)

707 (7.9)

19 (1.1)

11 (1.0)

English

Japanese
Bilinguals
Canada

677 (3.9)

674 (4.4)

-3 (0.5)

725 (4.7)

741 (4.6)

16 (-0.1)

6 (0.2)

Japan

662 (3.2)

670 (3.3)

8 (0.1)

683 (3.5)

697 (4.3)

14 (0.8)

11 (0.5)

Canada

633 (3.2)

639 (6.0)

6 (2.8)

676 (2.4)

681 (4.6)

5 (2.2)

6 (2.5)

Japan

625 (2.6)

631 (3.3)

6 (0.7)

641 (2.3)

653 (4.1)

12 (1.8)

9 (1.2)

Japanese

Japanese
For verification latency, The NO responses (14.3% of data across
bilinguals and monolinguals) and then RT outliers (residuals
greater than 2.5 standard deviation in absolute values; 1.6% of
data) were removed from the analyses. As for the English version,
the Group x Culture-Pair interaction was not significant,  2(1) =
1.32, p = .22. However, here the Group x Culture-Pair x
Feature-Type interaction was also not significant.
For verification rates, as for the English version, there was a
significant Group x Culture-Pair interaction,  2(1) = 4.70, p < .05.
Post-hoc comparisons revealed that bilinguals' verification rates
for pairs with Canada-specific features were higher than
Japanese monolinguals, t = -2.73, p < .01, while both groups had
similar verification rates for pairs with Japan-specific features,
t = -0.45, p = .65. As for the English version, the Group x
Culture-Pair x Feature-Type interaction was not significant.
Feature-priming task
Mean latencies and error rates for the English and Japanese versions of the task are presented in Table 3.
English
In the RT data, there was a significant effect of Relation,  2(1) =
37.02, p < .001. Related features produced greater facilitation for
targets than unrelated features. However, neither of the interactions of interest was significant.
In the error data, there was again a significant main effect of
Relation,  2(1) = 19.88, p < .001; there were fewer errors on target
words preceded by a related feature than an unrelated feature.
There was also a significant Relation x Group x Culture-Pair interaction,  2(1) = 4.54, p < .05. Post hoc analyses revealed that, for
pairs with Japan-specific features, bilinguals produced a significant
facilitatory priming effect, t = -2.28, p < .05, whereas English monolinguals did not, t = -1.25, p = 0.21. For pairs with Canada-specific
features, on the other hand, bilinguals did not show a significant
priming effect, t = -1.63, p = 0.10, whereas English monolinguals

did, t = 3.60, p < .05. The Relation x Group x Culture-Pair x
Feature-Type interaction was not significant.
Japanese
The RT results were much the same as for the English version.
There was a significant main effect for Relation,  2(1) = 17.30,
p < .001. Related pairs were responded to faster than unrelated
pairs. However, neither of the interactions of interest was significant. In the error data, there was also a significant main effect for
Relation,  2(1) = 11.35, p < .001, but again neither of the interactions of interest were significant.
Summary
Bilinguals' performance differed from that of monolinguals in both
languages, demonstrating a semantic accent in each language. In
comparison to English monolinguals on the English versions of
the tasks, bilinguals gave lower typicality ratings and were less likely
to verify items with Canada-specific features, and they gave higher
typicality ratings and were more likely to verify Japan-specific features. In the error data of the English feature-priming task, bilinguals showed a priming effect only for Japan-specific features
whereas English monolinguals showed a priming effect only for
Canada-specific features. In comparison to Japanese monolinguals
on the Japanese versions of the tasks, bilinguals gave higher typicality ratings and were more likely to verify pairs with
Canada-specific features. Decision data were more sensitive than
latency data in the feature-verification and feature-priming tasks,
and there was little evidence that effects depended on feature type.
Does the processing of culture-specific pairs by bilinguals
depend on the language of the task?
The analyses compared the performance of bilinguals on the English
and Japanese versions of each task. Fixed factors included: Language
(English vs. Japanese; sum coded), Culture-Pair (Canadian vs.
Japanese word-feature pairs; sum coded), Feature-Type (Perceptual

Bilingualism: Language and Cognition

145

vs. Situational; sum coded), and their interaction terms. The featurepriming task had the additional fixed factor of prime-target Relation
(Related vs. Unrelated; sum coded). Random factors included: subject (random intercept and random slope adjustment for Language,
Culture-Pair, and Feature-Type) and items (random intercept only).
The relevant data can be seen in the same Figures and Table as for
the previous question (Figures 2 & 3, Table 3).

Summary
Bilinguals processed culture-specific pairs differently depending
on the language of the task. There was a Language x CulturePair interaction in the typicality ratings data, the featureverification RT and rates data, and in the RT data in the featurepriming task. Generally, congruency between the language of the
task and the culture of the feature led to enhanced performance.

Feature-typicality ratings
There was a significant Language x Culture-Pair interaction,  2(1) =
640.87, p < .001. Bilinguals' ratings for pairs with Japan-specific features were considerably higher when the task was in Japanese than
when it was in English (t = 5.14, p < .05), whereas their ratings for
pairs with Canada-specific features were only slightly higher when
they completed the ratings in English compared to Japanese
(t = -1.30, p < .20). There was also a Language x Culture-Pair x
Feature-Type interaction,  2 (1) = 6.27, p < .05. The language of
the task did not differentially affect ratings of Japanese perceptual
and situational pairs, but it did have a somewhat larger impact on
Canadian perceptual pairs than situational pairs.

Is the processing of culture-specific pairs by bilinguals
influenced by L2 proficiency or cultural exposure?

Feature-verification task
For verification latency, there was a significant Language x
Culture-Pair interaction,  2(1) = 37.97, p < .001. Responses to
pairs with Canada-specific features were marginally faster than
responses to pairs with Japan-specific features when the task
was in English (t = 1.77, p = .08), whereas responses to pairs
with Japan-specific features were marginally faster than responses
to pairs with Canada-specific features when the task was in
Japanese (t = -1.88, p = .06). Furthermore, there was a significant
Language x Culture-Pair x Feature-Type interaction,  2(1) =
23.89, p < .001. Post-hoc comparisons revealed that, when the
task was in English, pairs with Japanese-specific situational features had longer latencies than pairs with Canadian-specific situational features, t = 2.72, p < .01, whereas, when the task was in
Japanese, pairs with Canadian situational features had marginally
longer latencies than pairs with Japanese situational features,
t = -1.97, p = .05. There was no impact of Culture-Pair on latencies
for perceptual features in either language.
For verification rates, there was also a significant Language x
Culture-Pair interaction,  2(1) = 109.93, p < .001. Post hoc comparisons revealed that bilinguals verified pairs with Canadaspecific features more often than pairs with Japan-specific features
when the task was in English, z = -1.90, p = .06, while they verified
pairs with Japan-specific features more often than pairs with
Canada-specific features when the task was in Japanese, z =
3.88, p < .001. The Language x Culture-Pair x Feature-Type interaction was not significant.
Feature-priming task
In the RT data, there was a significant interaction of Relation x
Language x Culture-Pair,  2 (1) = 7.04, p < .01. Post-hoc comparisons revealed that when the words were in English, there were
significant priming effects for both pairs with Canada-specific
features, t = 3.88, p < .001, and Japan-specific features, t = 2.38,
p < .05. However, when the words were in Japanese, a priming
effect was only present for pairs with Japan-specific features,
t = 3.14, p < .01, but not for pairs with Canada-specific features,
t = 1.03, p = .30. The Relation x Group x Culture-Pair x
Feature-Type interaction was not significant. In the error data,
neither of the interactions of interest were significant.

The analyses investigated whether individual differences in L2 proficiency and cultural exposure influence bilinguals' processing of
the culture-specific pairs, and, if so, whether one of these variables
better accounts for performance than the other. L2 proficiency was
based on the d' scores from the English vocabulary test and
Cultural-Exposure was the number of years lived in an Englishspeaking country. The analyses started with a baseline model
(Model 1) that included the main effects of the four fixed factors:
Culture-Pair (Canada- vs. Japan-specific word-feature pairs; sum
coded), Feature-Type (Perceptual vs. Situational; sum coded), L2
Proficiency (continuous; scaled), and L2 Cultural-Exposure (continuous; scaled). Random effects included intercepts for subjects
and items, as well as the by-subject random slope for
Culture-Pair and the by-item random slope for the effect of L2
Cultural-Exposure. To examine whether the interaction between
Culture-Pair and each of the individual differences variables
improved model fit, a series of model comparisons was performed
using the likelihood ratio test. L2 Proficiency (Model 2) and
Cultural-Exposure (Model 3) were each added independently to
the baseline model. If both improved model fit, then both were
included simultaneously in a model (Model 4). This model was
then compared to each of the previous models to see if it was a significantly better fit to the data. This process is illustrated in detail
for the first data set, and, thereafter, just the final models are
described. To further simplify the presentation, only the critical
interactions in the final models are mentioned in the text. The
feature-priming analyses were more complex because the
Relation variable was also included. Those analyses are described
in more detail when the data for that task are presented.
Feature-typicality ratings
English
The addition to the baseline model of the Culture-Pair x L2
Proficiency interaction (Model 2) significantly improved the
model fit,  2 (1) = 5.78, p < .05, as did the addition to the baseline
model of the Culture-Pair x Cultural-Exposure interaction (Model
3),  2(1) = 39.40, p < .001. Furthermore, the addition to the baseline
model of both the Culture-Pair x L2 Proficiency and the
Culture-Pair x Culture-Exposure interactions (Model 4) provided
a better fit compared to Model 2 with the Culture-Pair x L2
Proficiency interaction alone,  2 (1) = 33.78, p < .001, but did not
improve the fit compared to Model 3 with the Culture-Pair x
Cultural-Exposure interaction alone,  2(1) = .16, p = .69. These
results imply that the model fit was improved by the addition of
the Culture-Pair x Cultural-Exposure interaction but not the further addition of the Culture-Pair x L2 Proficiency interaction.
Indeed, the numerical comparison of negative log likelihood
revealed that Model 3 (-51866) has a better fit compared to
Model 2 (-52167). In Model 3, the critical Culture-Pair x
Culture-Exposure interaction was significant,  2 (1) = 44.41,
p < .001 (see Figure 4, top). Post-hoc comparisons revealed that

146

Eriko Matsuki, Yasushi Hino and Debra Jared

Japanese
Model 3 was also the best fit for the Japanese typicality ratings.
In that model, the Culture-Pair x Culture-Exposure interaction
was significant,  2 (1) = 63.58, p < .001 (see Figure 4, bottom).
Post-hoc comparisons revealed that more L2 cultural exposure is
associated with significantly higher ratings for pairs with
Canada-specific features, t = 5.32, p < .001, but significantly lower
ratings for pairs with Japan-specific features, t = -2.15, p < .001.
That is, with more time in the L2 culture, typicality ratings diverge
more from those of monolingual Japanese participants.
Collinearity
An important issue that needs to be addressed is that L2 Proficiency
and L2 Cultural-Exposure are correlated, r = .48, p < .001, and they
suffer from mild collinearity, k = 13.19. Thus, the results reported
above need to be further investigated to determine whether the effect
of L2 Proficiency is truly absent. To do this we tested the effect of L2
Proficiency while keeping L2 Cultural-Exposure constant by analyzing a subset of the data. Specifically, we tested a model for each language version to see if there is a Culture-Pair x L2 Proficiency
interaction using data from bilinguals who have never lived in L2
speaking countries (n = 32). Fixed factors included: Culture-Pair
(Canadian vs. Japanese word-feature pairs; sum coded), L2
Proficiency (continuous), and their interaction term. Random factors included: subject (random intercept and random slope adjustment for Culture-Pair) and items (random intercept and random
slope adjustment for L2 Proficiency). There was no significant
Culture-Pair x L2 Proficiency interaction, either in the data from
the English version of the task,  2 (1) = 1.05, p = .31, or from the
Japanese version of the task,  2 (1) = 0.10, p = .75, which means
that L2 proficiency does not differentially influence the typicality ratings for the Canada-specific and Japan-specific culture pairs.
Therefore, the results of the best-fit models (Model 3) are likely to
be valid, because the effect of L2 Proficiency is still absent when
L2 Cultural-Exposure is kept constant.

Fig. 4. The Culture Pair (Canadian vs Japanese pairs) x L2 Cultural Exposure (in years)
interaction effect on English (top) and Japanese (bottom) typicality ratings. The dots
indicate the mean typicality ratings given by the respective monolingual participants.

more L2 cultural exposure is associated with higher ratings for pairs
with Canada-specific features, t = 5.15, p < .001, although not significantly lower ratings for pairs with Japan-specific features, t
= -1.67, p = .10. Figure 4 (top) also displays points indicating the
mean typicality ratings for pairs with Canada- and Japan-specific
features by English monolinguals on the English version. As can
be seen in that Figure, it takes a surprisingly large number of
years of L2 cultural exposure before the bilinguals' ratings for
pairs with Canada-specific features approach the ratings of monolingual English speakers, and their ratings for pairs with
Japanese-specific features remained substantially higher than
those of English monolinguals even after a lengthy stay.

Feature-verification task
English
The latency data are based only on verified responses (25.8% of
trials for bilinguals were excluded because they received "NO"
responses). As for the typicality-rating data, Model 3 had the
best fit. In this model, there was a significant Culture-Pair x L2
Cultural-Exposure interaction effect,  2 (1) = 2.34, p < .05. As L2
cultural exposure increases, response times for pairs with
Canadian-specific features become faster but response times do
not change for pairs with Japanese-specific features (see
Figure 5, top left). The results of further analyses with bilinguals
with no L2 cultural exposure confirmed that there is no
Culture-Pair x L2 Proficiency interaction,  2 (1) = 0.39, p = .53,
indicating that the L2 Cultural-Exposure is likely to be the factor
responsible for the interaction with Culture-Pair.
In the verification rates data, Model 4 had the best fit. In that
model, the Culture-Pair x L2 Proficiency interaction was significant,  2(1) = 3.97, p < .05. Post-hoc comparisons revealed that
more L2 proficiency was associated with higher verification
rates for pairs with Canada-specific features, z = 2.69, p < .01,
but not for pairs with Japanese-specific features, z = 1.25, p = .21.
There was also a significant Culture-Pair x L2 Culture-Exposure
interaction,  2(1) = 9.20, p < .01, indicating that more cultural
exposure was associated with higher verification rates for pairs
with Canada-specific features, z = 3.92, p < .001, but not for
pairs with Japan-specific features, z = 1.36, p = .17 (see Figure 5,

Bilingualism: Language and Cognition

147

Fig. 5. The Culture Pair (Canadian vs Japanese pairs) x L2 Cultural Exposure (in years) interaction effect on English (top) and Japanese (bottom) verification latency
(left) and verification rates (right). The dots indicate the means from the respective monolingual participants.

top right). Similar to the analyses conducted for typicality ratings,
these results were further investigated to check the influence of
collinearity between L2 Proficiency and Cultural-Exposure. The
analyses (using the data from bilinguals with no L2 cultural
exposure) revealed that there was no longer a significant
Culture-Pair x L2 Proficiency interaction,  2 (1) = 0.14 p = .71,
which implies that the interaction effect in Model 4 above is probably largely due to the Cultural-Exposure factor. Taken together,
the results suggest that cultural exposure, but not L2 proficiency,
is likely to differentially impact the verification rates for the two
types of culture pairs.
Japanese
The latency data are only based on verified responses (13.76% of
trials for bilinguals were excluded from the analyses). Neither

Model 2 nor Model 3 significantly improved the fit of the
model over the baseline model for the latency data (nor did
Model 4). As for the English version of the task, Model 4 had
the best fit for the verification rates data. In this model, the
Culture-Pair x L2 Proficiency interaction was significant,
 2(1) = 4.61, p < .05. With more L2 proficiency, the verification
rate for pairs with Canada-specific features increased while it
slightly declined for pairs with Japan-specific features.
Furthermore, there was a marginally significant Culture-Pair x
L2 Culture-Exposure interaction,  2(1) = 3.78, p < .06. More L2
cultural exposure led to a higher verification rate for pairs with
Canada-specific features, z = 1.88, p < .06, but not for pairs with
Japanese-specific features (see Figure 5, bottom right). Although
these analyses indicated the presence of two interactions
(i.e., Culture-Pair x L2 Proficiency and Culture-Pair x

148

Cultural-Exposure), further analyses revealed that the
Culture-Pair x L2 Proficiency interaction no longer exists,  2
(1) = 0.07, p = .78, when the Culture-Exposure factor is controlled
by only analyzing bilinguals with no L2 cultural exposure. This
finding indicates that the results above suffered from collinearity
between L2 Proficiency and L2 Cultural-Exposure, and L2 cultural
exposure is more likely to differentially impact the verification
rates for the two types of culture pairs.
Feature-priming task
The baseline model for these analyses included the main effects for
five factors (Relation, Culture-Pair, Feature-Type, L2 Proficiency,
and Cultural-Exposure), three relevant double interactions
(Relation x Culture-Pair, Relation x Feature-Type, Culture-Pair x
Feature-Type), and the random intercepts for subjects and items,
as well as by-subject random slope for Culture-Pair and by-item
random slope for L2 Proficiency. We examined whether including
the triple interactions of Relation x Cultural-Pair x L2 Proficiency
or Relation x Culture-Pair x Cultural-Exposure improved the fit
of models compared to the baseline model. The results can be summarized briefly. Model fit was not significantly improved by the
addition of any interactions of interest, in either language version
and for either the latency or error data.
Summary
The processing of culture-specific pairs was influenced more
strongly by L2 cultural exposure than by L2 proficiency. Not surprisingly, more L2 cultural exposure particularly influenced performance on Canada-specific pairs, with higher typicality
ratings and verification rates in both language versions and faster
verification times on the English version of the task with more
exposure to L2 culture. More L2 cultural exposure was also associated with lower typicality ratings on Japan-specific pairs,
although the difference was significant only when the task was
done in Japanese. L2 cultural exposure did not differentially affect
feature-priming effects for Canada- and Japan-specific pairs,
likely because these priming effects were not large to begin with.
Discussion
Semantic accents in Japanese-English bilinguals were investigated
using a feature-based approach. Although De Groot (1992) proposed quite some time ago that a feature-based model could be useful to describe how bilinguals represent translations that do not
have full meaning equivalence in two languages, and Dong et al.
(2005) extended her view to provide a developmental account of
L2 learning, there has been little research to date that focuses on
the specific features that contribute to semantic accents.
Empirical evidence for semantic accents is mostly based on object
naming studies; few studies have directly examined word-feature
connections. To fill this gap and to further explore the development
of semantic accents, we tested the predictions of the SDA model
(Dong et al., 2005), and also explored how other factors, including
the amount of cultural exposure and feature type, influence the
development of bilingual semantic accents. Three main findings
and their implications are discussed in the next three sections.
Semantic accents: Differences between bilinguals and
monolinguals
We examined semantic accents by comparing Japanese-English
bilinguals with Japanese and English monolinguals. Using

Eriko Matsuki, Yasushi Hino and Debra Jared

language-specific word-feature pairs, we observed semantic
accents at the feature level in experiments that involved three different tasks, including feature-typicality rating, featureverification, and feature-priming tasks. Generally, semantic
accents were more salient in English (L2) compared to Japanese
(L1), which is reasonable given that most bilinguals had
Japanese as their dominant language and there was already a wellestablished L1 representation before L2 learning began. Although
evidence that bilingual lexical-conceptual representations differ
from those of monolinguals has been already found in several
object naming studies (e.g., Ameel et al., 2005; Zinszer et al.,
2014; Malt et al., 2015; Pavlenko & Malt, 2011), the data from
this study provide further understanding of semantic accents
through examining the connection between words and culturespecific features.
All three tasks performed in English revealed that bilinguals had
semantic accents in English. In the feature-typicality rating and the
feature-verification tasks, the bilinguals perceived Japan-specific features to be more representative of the word and Canada-specific features to be less representative compared to English monolinguals. In
the feature-priming task, the bilinguals produced a priming effect
for pairs with Japan-specific features and a marginal priming effect
for pairs with Canada-specific features, while English monolinguals
showed the priming effect only for Canada-specific features. These
findings indicate that the bilinguals have weaker connections to
Canada-specific (L2) features and stronger connections to
Japan-specific (L1) features compared to English monolinguals.
The difference in priming effects between bilinguals and monolinguals provides particularly strong evidence because it indicates
that the accents in L2 can be observed even if bilinguals do not
explicitly seek the relationship between words and features. These
semantic accents in L2 can be explained by the SDA model by
assuming that the bilinguals have created links between L2 lexical
representations and L1 culture-specific features, and have not yet
developed as strong links between L2 culture-specific features and
L2 lexical representations as monolinguals.
In contrast, the results from the Japanese tasks revealed that
bilinguals and Japanese monolinguals differed only in the featuretypicality ratings and the feature-verification tasks but not in the
feature-priming task. For the first two tasks, the bilinguals perceived Canada-specific features to be more representative of the
word compared to Japanese monolinguals, but both groups
responded similarly to the Japan-specific features. These findings
indicate that bilinguals' semantic accents in L1 mainly arose from
their knowledge of L2-specific features, while the acquisition of L2
does not necessarily weaken the L1-specific word-feature connections. These findings can be explained by the SDA model by
assuming that the bilinguals have created some links between
L2 culture-specific features and L1 lexical representations, but
their links between L1 culture-specific features and L1 lexical
representations have not been altered by the acquisition of L2.
In the feature-priming task, between-group differences were not
observed, which is possibly because semantic accents in L1 were
relatively subtle compared to the accents in L2.
L1 and L2 conceptual asymmetry in bilinguals
The results for bilinguals were not the same for both languages,
suggesting that they activated somewhat different conceptual
information depending on the language of task (although the
extent of the difference varies depending on L2 cultural exposure,
which will be discussed in detail in the next section). The current

Bilingualism: Language and Cognition

study has, therefore, provided evidence for conceptual asymmetry
at the level of features. Such conceptual asymmetry can be
explained by the SDA model by assuming that culture-specific
features can have stronger links to the lexical representations of
one language than the other.
The results from the feature-typicality rating and featureverification tasks revealed that the bilinguals on average perceived
Canada-specific features to be more representative of words in the
English (L2) task than in the Japanese (L1) task, while
Japan-specific features were more representative in the Japanese
task than in the English task. That is, these findings provide evidence for stronger connections for language-congruent wordfeature pairs (e.g., pairs with Canada-specific features in the
English task) compared to language-incongruent pairs (e.g.,
pairs with Canada-specific features in the Japanese task). These
findings are consistent with those of the object naming study
by Jared et al. (2013), in which bilinguals named culturally-biased
images of objects faster when the language of the task was congruent than when it was incongruent, and the subsequent wordpicture matching task (Pan et al., in press).
In the feature-priming task, priming effects were found in pairs
with Japan-specific features regardless of the language of the task,
indicating that these features had strong connections to word
forms in both languages. On the other hand, the priming effect
for pairs with Canada-specific features was only found in the
English task and not in the Japanese task. This is a particularly
interesting finding because it provides evidence that bilinguals are
not merely learning new features for a word, but those acquired conceptual features are linked to word forms in each language at different strengths, causing asymmetrical conceptual representations.
The influence of L2 proficiency and cultural exposure
We investigated the developmental change hypothesis of the SDA
by examining the impact of L2 proficiency and cultural exposure
on performance in our tasks. According to the predictions from
the SDA model, more L2 proficiency would reduce semantic
accents in bilinguals' L2 by developing stronger connections to
L2-specific features and weakening the links to L1-specific features. On the other hand, greater L2 proficiency would lead to
stronger semantic accents in their L1 due to the influence of
their L2 knowledge. The results of the current study, however,
indicate that more L2 proficiency is not associated with a significant change in the connection strength between words and
culture-specific features. Instead, more L2 cultural exposure was
associated with stronger connections between L2 words and
L2-specific features as well as a weaker connection between L2
words and L1-specific features, resulting in weaker L2 semantic
accents. Furthermore, more cultural exposure was also associated
with stronger connections between L1 words and L2-specific features, leading bilinguals to exhibit semantic accents when performing tasks in their L1. These conclusions are supported by
the analyses showing that bilinguals with no experience residing
in L2-speaking countries differed little in their semantic accents
as a function of their L2 proficiency. A perhaps surprising aspect
of the results was in just how much L2 cultural exposure is needed
for the strength of connections between L2-specific features and
L2 words to approach those of native speakers.
The influence of such individual differences, however, was not
found in the feature-priming task. More specifically, the presence
or the size of feature-priming effect was not modulated by either
L2 proficiency or cultural exposure. This is possibly because the

149

priming effects were too small to observe gradual change as a function of either variable. A likely reason that effects were not larger is
that the culture-specific features are typically more peripheral rather
than central or defining features. Thus, the feature-priming task
may be of limited utility in understanding how individual differences influence the acquisition of culture-specific features.
One important finding regarding the effect of L2 cultural
exposure is that the data from the feature-typicality rating task
and the feature-verification task indicate somewhat different conclusions about how Japan-specific features are perceived by bilinguals with different amounts of cultural exposure. In both
Japanese and English versions, the typicality ratings for pairs
with Japan-specific features declined with more L2 cultural exposure, while the verification rates remained unchanged regardless of
amount of cultural exposure. This finding may indicate that
untimed explicit judgment is more sensitive to subtle changes
in how bilinguals consciously perceive certain word-feature
pairs. On the other hand, the responses on the speeded binary
decision task may indicate that, at a more implicit level of processing, the connections between L1-specific word-feature pairs are
less susceptible to change.
Another issue to note is that the data from the current study
indicate little effect of L2 proficiency while Dong et al. (2005)
found that proficiency does impact bilinguals' conceptual representations. One possible cause of the discrepancy may be differences in the stimuli selected. The current study employed 120
word-feature stimuli that ranged in domains of knowledge (e.g.,
visual feature, location, function) that can be experienced through
physical experience of the surrounding environment. Dong et al.
(2005), on the other hand, used only 16 groups of words and they
had to limit their analyses to nine groups of words to observe the
effect of proficiency on the Chinese (L2) task. Thus, it might be
the case that the language-specific conceptual information
involved in some of their stimuli may be obtained through
more experience with the language itself, not necessarily the physical cultural experience. Thus, it is quite likely that bilinguals' conceptual representations change as a function of L2 proficiency or/
and L2 cultural exposure, depending on the kind of languagespecific information. It is important to note that our data were
not longitudinal, and such data are needed to confirm our conclusions about developmental changes. Finally, the two languages
investigated here are quite different, as are the associated cultures.
Further research needs to extend our study to pairs of languages
which are more similar and are associated with more similar
cultures.
Conclusions
Words in one language that do not have a perfectly matching
translation in another language pose a communication challenge
for individuals who are learning a second language. Both the DCF
model and the SDA model characterize such cross-language differences in terms of language-specific features, but little research
has focused on these features. Here we explored a feature-based
approach, employing three feature-based tasks from the monolingual literature on semantic representations, and we demonstrated
that these tasks can provide useful insights into bilingual's lexicalconceptual representations. Our results broadly supported Dong
et al.'s (2005) SDA model, although here L2 cultural exposure
rather than proficiency was a critical variable. Cultural immersion
appears to be particularly helpful in gaining native-like lexicalconceptual representations: however, the process is a long one.

150
Supplementary Material. For supplementary material accompanying this
paper, visit https://doi.org/10.1017/S1366728920000322
Appendices S1-S3 provide full details of the analyses.
Acknowledgements. This research was supported by a grant from the
Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada to Debra
Jared. We thank Ken McRae, Paul Minda, and Barbara Malt for their feedback
on an earlier version of this work, Masahiro Yoshihara and Keisuke Ida for
assistance in testing participants in Japan, and Kaz Matsuki for advice on
the statistical analyses.

References
Amano S and Kondo T (2000) Nihongo no goi tokusei [Lexical characteristics
of Japanese language]. NTT database series, (Dai 2 ki; 7 kan, CD-Rom version) [number 2; volume 7, CD-Rom version]. Tokyo: Sanseido.
Ameel E, Storms G, Malt BC and Sloman SA (2005) How bilinguals solve the
naming problem. Journal of Memory and Language 53, 60-80. doi: 10.1016/
j.jml.2005.02.004
Athanasopoulos P (2015) Conceptual representation in bilinguals: The role of
language specificity and conceptual change. In Schwieter JW (ed),
Cambridge handbook of bilingual processing. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press, pp. 275-292.
Balota DA, Yap MJ, Cortese MJ, Hutchison KA, Kessler B, Loftis B, Neely
JH, Nelson DL, Simpson GB and Treiman R (2007) The English lexicon
project. Behavior Research Methods 39, 445-459. doi: 10.3758/BF03193014
Barsalou LW (1982) Context-independent and context-dependent information in concepts. Memory & Cognition 10, 82-93. doi: 10.3758/BF03197629
Bates D, Maechler M, Bolker B and Walker S (2015) Fitting linear
mixed-effects models using lme4. Journal of Statistical Software 67, 1-48.
doi: 10.18637/jss.v067.i01
Brysbaert M and New B (2009) Moving beyond Kucera and Francis: A critical
evaluation of current word frequency norms and the introduction of a new
and improved word frequency measure for American English. Behavior
Research Methods 41, 977-990. doi: 10.3758/BRM.41.4.97
Collins AM and Quillian MR (1969) Retrieval time from semantic memory.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 8, 240-247. doi: 10.1016/
S0022-5371(69)80069-1
Cree GS, McNorgan C and McRae K (2006) Distinctive features hold a privileged status in the computation of word meaning: Implications for theories of semantic memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition 32, 643-658. doi: 10.1037/0278-7393.32.4.643
De Groot AMB (1992) Bilingual lexical representation: A closer look at conceptual representations. Advances in Psychology 94, 389-412. doi: 10.1016/
S0166-4115(08)62805-8
De Groot AMB (2011) Language and cognition in bilinguals and multilinguals: An introduction. New York: Psychology Press.
De Groot AMB (2012) Vocabulary learning in bilingual first-language acquisition and late second-language-learning. In Faust M (ed), The handbook of
the neuropsychology of language. Oxford, UK: Wiley-Blackwell, pp. 472-493.
doi:10.1002/9781118432501.ch23
De Groot AMB (2014) About phonological, grammatical, and semantic
accents in bilinguals' language use and their cause. In Filipovi L and
Putz M (eds), Multilingual cognition and language use: Processing and typological perspectives. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, pp. 229-262.
Dijkstra T, Wahl A, Buytenhuijs F, Van Halem N, Al-Jibouri Z, De Korte M
and Rekke S (2019) Multilink: A computational model for bilingual word
recognition and word translation. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition 22,
657-679. doi:10.1017/S1366728918000287.
Dong Y, Gui S and MacWhinney B (2005) Shared and separate meanings in
the bilingual mental lexicon. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition 8, 221-
238. doi: 10.1017/S1366728905002270
Forster K and Forster JC (2003) DMDX: A Windows display program with
millisecond accuracy. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments and
Computers 35, 116-124. doi: 10.3758/BF03195503
Fox J and Weisberg S (2011) An {R} Companion to Applied Regression (2nd
edn.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Eriko Matsuki, Yasushi Hino and Debra Jared
Jared D, Poh RPY and Paivio A (2013) L1 and L2 picture naming in
Mandarin-English bilinguals: A test of Bilingual Dual Coding Theory.
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition 16, 383-396. doi: 10.1017/
S1366728912000685
Jiang N (2002) Form-meaning mapping in vocabulary acquisition in a second
language. Studies in Second Language Acquisition 24, 617-637. doi:
10.1017/S0272263102004047
Jin Y- S (1990) Effects of concreteness on cross-language priming in lexical
decisions. Perceptual and Motor Skills 70, 1139-1154. doi: 10.2466/
pms.1990.70.3c.1139
Kroll JF and De Groot AMB (1997) Lexical and conceptual memory in the
bilingual: Mapping form to meaning in two languages. In De Groot
AMB and Kroll JF (eds), Tutorials in bilingualism: Psycholinguistic perspectives. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, pp. 169-199.
Lemhofer K and Broersma M (2012) Introducing LexTALE: A quick and
valid lexical test for advanced learners of English. Behavior Research
Methods 44, 325-343. doi: 10.3758/s13428-011-0146-0
Lupyan G and Lewis M (2019) From words-as-mappings to words-as-cues:
The role of language in semantic knowledge. Language, Cognition, and
Neuroscience 34, 1319-1337. doi.org/10.1080/23273798.2017.1404114
Malt BC (2019) Understanding L2 word learning outcomes: The roles of
semantic relations, input, and language dissimilarity. International
Journal of Bilingualism. Online first publication doi: 10.1177/
1367006918814376
Malt BC and Sloman SA (2003) Linguistic diversity and object naming by
non-native speakers of English. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition 6,
47-67. doi: 10.1017/S1366728903001020
Malt BC, Li P, Pavlenko A, Zhu H and Ameel E (2015) Bidirectional lexical
interaction in late immersed Mandarin-English bilinguals. Journal of
Memory and Language 82, 86-104. doi: 10.1016/j.jml.2015.03.001
Marian V, Blumenfeld HK and Kaushanskaya M (2007) The language
experience and proficiency questionnaire (LEAP-Q): Assessing language
profiles in bilinguals and multilinguals. Journal of Speech, Language, and
Hearing Research 50, 940-967. doi: 10.1044/1092-4388(2007/067)
Masuda T, Ishii K, Miwa K, Rashid M, Lee H and Mahdi R (2017) One label
or two? Linguistic influences on the similarity judgment of objects between
English and Japanese speakers. Frontiers in Psychology 8, 1637. doi:
10.3389/fpsyg.2017.01637
Matsuki E (2018) Conceptual representation in bilinguals: A feature-based
approach. PhD dissertation, University of Western Ontario. Retrieved
from https://ir.lib.uwo.ca/etd/5899/
McRae K, de Sa VR and Seidenberg MS (1997) On the nature and scope of
featural representations of word meaning. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General 126, 99-130. doi: 10.1037/0096-3445.126.2.99
Mok PPK and Yu ACL (2016) The effects of language immersion on the bilingual lexicon. Linguistic Approaches to Bilingualism 7, 614-636. doi: 10.1075/
lab.15029.mok
Norman DA and Rumelhart DE (1975) Explorations in cognition.
San Francisco: Freeman.
Pan X, Xiong A, Jouravlev O and Jared D (in press) Conceptual representations in bicultural bilinguals: An ERP approach. Language, Cognition, and
Neuroscience.
Paradis M (1997) The cognitive neuropsychology of bilingualism. In De Groot
AMB and JF Kroll (eds), Tutorials in bilingualism: Psycholinguistic perspectives. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, pp. 331-354.
Pavlenko A (2005) Bilingualism and thought. In Kroll JF and de Groot AMB
(eds), Handbook of bilingualism: Psycholinguistic approaches. Oxford
University Press, pp. 433-453.
Pavlenko A (2009) Conceptual representation in the bilingual lexicon and
second language vocabulary learning. In Pavlenko A. (ed), The bilingual
mental lexicon: Interdisciplinary approaches. Buffalo, NY: Multilingual
Matters, pp. 125-160.
Pavlenko A and Malt BC (2011) Kitchen Russian: Cross-linguistic differences
and first-language object naming by Russian-English bilinguals.
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition 14, 19-45. doi: 10.1017/
S136672891000026X
R Core Team. (2012) R: A language and environment for statistical computing.
R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria.

Bilingualism: Language and Cognition

151

Rogers TT and McClelland JL (2004) Semantic cognition: A parallel distributed processing approach. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Solomon KO and Barsalou LW (2001) Representing properties locally.
Cognitive Psychology 43, 129-169. doi: 10.1006/cogp.2001.0754
Van Hell JG and De Groot AMB (1998) Conceptual representation in bilingual memory: Effects of concreteness and cognate status in word

association. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition 1, 193-211. doi:
10.1017/S1366728998000352
Zinszer BD, Malt B, Ameel E and Li P (2014) Native-likeness in second language lexical categorization reflects individual language history and linguistic community norms. Frontiers in Psychology 5, 1-16. doi: 10.3389/
fpsyg.2014.01203

Appendix Critical Stimuli Used in the Experimental Tasks.

Word

Feature

Feature
(translation)

Word (translation)

Culture

Type



Canada

perceptual

air conditioner

made of metal



apartment

has an elevator





Canada

perceptual

armour

made of steel





Canada

perceptual

bag

made of plastic





Canada

perceptual

basement

has a washing machine





Canada

perceptual

car

has a steering wheel on the left





Canada

perceptual

couch

has pillows





Canada

perceptual

cucumber

is straight





Canada

perceptual

dishwasher

has a door





Canada

perceptual

electrical outlet

has three holes





Canada

perceptual

fence

made of wood





Canada

perceptual

house

has a basement





Canada

perceptual

money

is colourful





Canada

perceptual

mushroom

is white





Canada

perceptual

textbook

is heavy





Canada

perceptual

bacon

is crispy





Canada

perceptual

bathroom

has a curtain





Canada

perceptual

bread

has peanut butter





Canada

perceptual

building

made of bricks





Canada

perceptual

bus

is yellow





Canada

perceptual

checkout

has a conveyor belt





Canada

perceptual

comics

has superhero pictures





Canada

perceptual

drug store

has a post office





Canada

perceptual

farm

has chickens





Canada

perceptual

kettle

has an electrical cord





Canada

perceptual

kitchen

has an oven





Canada

perceptual

parsley

has flat leaves





Canada

perceptual

salmon

is pink





Canada

perceptual

subway

has graffiti





Canada

perceptual

teacup

has a handle





Canada

perceptual

balloon

used at birthday parties





Canada

situational

apple

used to make sauce





Canada

situational

avocado

used to make guacamole





Canada

situational

barbeque

found in backyards





Canada

situational
(Continued )

152

Eriko Matsuki, Yasushi Hino and Debra Jared

Appendix (Continued.)
Word

Feature

Word (translation)

Feature
(translation)

Culture

Type

bathtub

used for showers





Canada

situational

canoe

used on lakes





Canada

situational

deer

is edible





Canada

situational

fireplace

found in houses





Canada

situational

French fries

eaten with gravy





Canada

situational

icing

used on a cake





Canada

situational

lake

used for swimming





Canada

situational

pencil case

holds a calculator





Canada

situational

postcard

used while travelling





Canada

situational

Santa

found in shopping malls





Canada

situational

squirrel

found in parks





Canada

situational

tokens

used to ride the subway





Canada

situational

basket

used at Easter





Canada

situational

broccoli

eaten raw





Canada

situational

campfire

used to roast marshmallows





Canada

situational

closet

used to store shoes





Canada

situational

groceries

bought once a week





Canada

situational

gun

used for hunting





Canada

situational

hockey

played on ice





Canada

situational

mask

used at costume parties





Canada

situational

milk

comes in bags





Canada

situational

pine tree

used for Christmas decoration





Canada

situational

pumpkin

used to make a pie





Canada

situational

snail

eaten as an appetizer





Canada

situational

television

has a cable fee





Canada

situational

tuna

found in cans





Canada

situational

broom

made of bamboo





Japan

perceptual

coin

has a hole





Japan

perceptual

curry

contains carrots





Japan

perceptual

hair

is black





Japan

perceptual

mailbox

has two slots





Japan

perceptual

public phone

is green





Japan

perceptual

rice

tastes sweet





Japan

perceptual

shower

has a hose





Japan

perceptual

resume

is handwritten





Japan

perceptual

taxi

has an automatic door





Japan

perceptual

tea

is a powder





Japan

perceptual

toilet

has a bidet





Japan

perceptual

traffic light

plays a melody





Japan

perceptual

vinegar

made of rice





Japan

perceptual

umbrella

is transparent





Japan

perceptual

beach

smells salty





Japan

perceptual
(Continued )

Bilingualism: Language and Cognition

153

Appendix (Continued.)
Word

Feature

Word (translation)

Feature
(translation)

Culture

Type

bike

has a basket





Japan

perceptual

cake

has strawberries





Japan

perceptual

crane

made of paper





Japan

perceptual

dragon

looks like a snake





Japan

perceptual

ghost

has long hair





Japan

perceptual

newspaper

is written vertically





Japan

perceptual

pear

is round





Japan

perceptual

school

has a swimming pool





Japan

perceptual

stove

has a flame





Japan

perceptual

sun

is red





Japan

perceptual

temple

has graves





Japan

perceptual

tomato

tastes sour





Japan

perceptual

train conductor

wears white gloves





Japan

perceptual

yoyo

contains water





Japan

perceptual

ashtray

found in restaurants





Japan

situational

bungalow

used when camping





Japan

situational

egg

used for sushi





Japan

situational

graduation

occurs in March





Japan

situational

grape

eaten by peeling the skin





Japan

situational

greeting

accompanied by bowing





Japan

situational

incense

found by grave stones





Japan

situational

jar

created by potters





Japan

situational

marathon

occurs in the winter





Japan

situational

motor cycle

used for delivery





Japan

situational

rabbit

seen in the moon





Japan

situational

rice cracker

eaten with tea





Japan

situational

soybean

eaten fermented





Japan

situational

uniform

worn in high school





Japan

situational

seafood

used on pizza





Japan

situational

barrel

used to store sake





Japan

situational

beer

sold in vending machines





Japan

situational

headband

used when playing a drum





Japan

situational

fish

eaten at breakfast





Japan

situational

stone

used to sharpen a knife





Japan

situational

goldfish

seen at festivals





Japan

situational

grill

used to cook fish





Japan

situational

hot spring

found in hotels





Japan

situational

kite

used at New Year's celebrations





Japan

situational

spaghetti

eaten with ketchup





Japan

situational

microwave

found in convenience stores





Japan

situational

octopus

caught in a jar





Japan

situational

shark

eaten in soup





Japan

situational

unicycle

found in schoolyards





Japan

situational

watermelon

eaten with salt





Japan

Situational

