Journal of Child Language (2022), 49, 602-614
doi:10.1017/S0305000921000234

ARTICLE

Jellybeans... or Jelly, Beans...? 5-6-year-olds can
identify the prosody of compounds but not lists
Nan XU RATTANASONE

, Ivan YUEN, Rebecca HOLT

, and Katherine DEMUTH

Department of Linguistics and Centre for Language Sciences, Macquarie University, Australia
Address for correspondence: Nan Xu Rattanasone (email: nan.xu@mq.edu.au)
(Received 25 March 2020; revised 31 October 2020; accepted 26 February 2021;
first published online 20 April 2021)

Abstract
Learning to use word versus phrase level prosody to identify compounds from lists is
thought to be a protracted process, only acquired by 11 years (Vogel & Raimy, 2002).
However, a recent study has shown that 5-year-olds can use prosodic cues other than
stress for these two structures in PRODUCTION, at least for early-acquired noun-noun
compounds (Yuen et al., 2021). This raises the question of whether children this age can
also use naturally-produced prosody to IDENTIFY noun-noun compounds from their list
forms in comprehension. The results show that 5-6-year-olds (N = 28) can only identify
compounds. Unlike adults, children as a group could not use boundary cues to identify
lists and were significantly slower in their processing compared to adults. This suggests
that the acquisition of word level prosody may precede the acquisition of phrase level
prosody, i.e., some higher-level aspects of phrasal prosody may take longer to acquire.
Keywords: compound prosody; prosodic boundary; comprehension; eye-tracking; child language acquisition

Introduction
In English, a language where compounding is highly productive, children have been
reported to construct novel compounds, e.g., nose-beards for moustaches, and exhibit
compound stress in their production at around 2 to 3 years (Becker, 1994; Clark, 1981;
Clark, Gelman & Lane, 1985). Although 3-5-year-olds show good semantic
understanding of familiar compounds, e.g., that chocolate-cake is a cake made of
chocolate (Krott & Nicoladis, 2005; Nicoladis, 2003), 5-year-olds cannot identify
UNFAMILIAR compounds like wetscrew in comprehension (Vogel & Raimy, 2002). Even in
studies using FAMILIAR compounds, e.g., chocolate-cake, there is still substantial individual
variation among children's performance, ranging from 43.8% to 93.8% correct (Wells,
Peppe & Goulandris, 2004). This variable performance across different studies may be
attributable to either the semantic understanding of different types of compounds, or
children's emerging ability to use prosodic cues (e.g., stress vs. duration, pauses) in
identifying compounds. This study re-examines children's use of prosodic cues in the
comprehension of early-acquired noun-noun compounds in an online eye-tracking task
to further probe their knowledge of the prosodic structure of compounds.
(c) The Author(s), 2021. Published by Cambridge University Press

Journal of Child Language

603

Compounds are prosodically complex, composed of two prosodic words (PW) to
form a new prosodic word: [[ jelly]PW [beans]PW]PW (cf. Wheeldon & Lahiri, 2002;
Wynne, Wheeldon & Lahiri, 2018). Treating a compound as a single prosodic word
will help children correctly identify `jellybeans and chips' as a two-item list. However,
treating a compound as two separate prosodic words will lead children to incorrectly
identify it as a three-item list `jelly, beans and chips'.
In English, compounds and their list forms differ in word (i.e., lexical) stress and
boundary-marking, which manifest through respective acoustic cues (e.g., pitch and
duration) in production. According to the compound stress rule, the second word of
a compound loses its primary stress, resulting in a strong-weak pattern for
`JEllybeans', while retaining it in the list form, resulting in a strong-strong pattern for
`JElly, BEANS' (Chomsky & Halle, 1968). Since primary stress is often acoustically
realised with high pitch, the second word in a compound will be lower in pitch than
the stressed counterpart in list form, i.e., beans in "jellybeans" will be lower in pitch
than in "jelly, beans".
By two-and-a-half (2;6) years, English-speaking children correctly assign primary
stress to the initial noun of noun-noun (N-N) compounds, and 2- to 4-year-olds can
produce the appropriate strong-weak stress pattern for 95% of novel N-N
compounds (Clark et al., 1985). Similarly, by 2;6 years, children can correctly
interpret the meaning of novel N-N compounds, e.g., by associating apple-knife with
a knife and not an apple (Clark et al., 1985). This shows that young children can use
stress information to derive the meaning of N-N compounds, i.e., that knife is the
head of the compound apple-knife, and apple is the modifier.
Apart from word stress, boundary cues can also help identify compounds. When a
compound is produced as a single prosodic word, there should not be any
word-internal prosodic boundary (Cutler & Butterfield, 1990). This means pauses are
less likely to be found in compounds. In contrast, for lists, each item is likely to be
treated as a phrase and marked with a pause and boundary. The presence of a
phrase boundary is typically also accompanied by pre-boundary lengthening, realised
as longer duration in the final syllable of a word before a phrase boundary (Snow,
1994; Wightman, Shattuck-Hufnagel, Ostendorf & Price, 1992). Therefore, the
second syllable of "jelly" will only be lengthened in the three-item list form but not
as a compound, e.g., jelly, beans & chips vs jellybeans & chips (where underlined
items should have pre-boundary lengthening).
A recent production study showed that 5-year-olds can PRODUCE different prosodic
cues (pitch, duration) N-N compounds and their list forms (e.g., jellybeans vs. jelly,
beans) similar to adults, suggesting an emerging representation for word and phrase
level prosodic structures (Yuen et al., 2021). However, children were more likely than
adults to use pauses within compounds, suggesting that their representations for
boundary cues may not yet be robust.
Children's ability to perceive boundary cues is inconsistently reported in the
literature. One study reported that 3-day-old infants can discriminate between
within- vs. between-word disyllables (Christophe, Dupoux, Bertoncini & Mehler,
1994). However, much older children reportedly cannot use boundary cues to
identify a novel compound vs. two separate prosodic words (in a noun phrase), e.g.,
wetscrew vs. wet screw, in a two-alternative forced-choice task (Vogel & Raimy,
2002). Five-year-olds could not identify compounds either, suggesting a bias against
compound interpretation (Vogel & Raimy, 2002). This finding seems inconsistent
with the study of much younger children showing that even infants are sensitive to

604

Nan Xu Rattanasone et al.

lexical stress and boundary cues in comprehension. One explanation might be that
transparency in meaning might influence how prosodic cues are evaluated in a task
that requires an explicit response from children. Thus, while young children show
good semantic understanding of N-N compounds, they show a lack of understanding
for other types of compounds in early development. For example, ill-formed
compounds in early production often involve verbs (V-N) e.g., cracking-nut (2;6) for
`nut-cracker' (Clark, Hecht & Mulford, 1986). Even at 6;5, children are not
productive in generating novel compounds involving inanimates (Clark et al., 1986),
the compound type that Vogel and Raimy (2002) used. This suggests that
compounds other than the N-N variety may be semantically more challenging for
young children. Perhaps they can perceive and produce the correct prosodic cues for
earlier acquired N-N compounds before they can do so for other compound types.
While compound stress cues occur at the lexical level, durational cues occur at the
phrase level. If the inconsistent reports of cue use in previous research is due to
children's (in)ability to use prosodic cues at different levels of structure, then young
children should show challenges even in identifying earlier acquired N-N compounds.
The current study
The current study therefore examined whether 5-6-year-olds can identify N-N
compounds from their list forms while listening to naturally produced speech. We
used an Intermodal Preferential Looking paradigm to explore the online processing
of compounds vs. their list forms, an area of research which is relatively
underexplored. This paradigm has the advantage of not requiring participants to
make overt response, while providing information on how prosodic cues are
processed over time. One study using eye-tracking with adult Japanese listeners
exploited the Compound Accent Rule (CAR) to see if adults could use the rule to
predict the presence of compounds vs. non-compound forms (Hirose & Mazuka,
2015). In Japanese, when CAR is applied, many words undergo changes in pitch,
e.g., words starting with High pitch are reassigned Low pitch when they are
produced as part of a compound (Hirose & Mazuka, 2015). For those words, adult
listeners can unambiguously determine when a compound word is expected after
hearing just the first word of the compound (Hirose & Mazuka, 2015). This suggests
that listeners are actively monitoring pitch information to help predict upcoming
words. Another online study using electroencephalography (EEG) with Englishspeaking adults found similar results, with misapplication of lexical level (compound)
prosody eliciting an earlier (N400) response than inappropriate phrase level (list)
prosody, which elicited a P600 (McCauley, Hestvik & Vogel, 2013). These results
suggest that processing of lexical and phrase-level prosody may proceed via different
mechanisms, which may be reflected in differences in the time-course of
disambiguation when the target stimulus carries compound vs. list prosody.
Given that 5-year-olds can PRODUCE the appropriate prosodic cues for compounds
and their related list forms (Yuen et al., 2021), we predicted that children this age
would also be able to use prosodic information to IDENTIFY both forms in
comprehension. Adult controls were also tested to determine if children would
perform differently from adults, given that children's use of prosodic cues in
production is less consistent. We further predicted that, even if these children can
identify compounds vs. lists, they might show slower or different patterns in
processing time compared to adults, given their inconsistent use of pauses in

Journal of Child Language

605

production (Yuen et al., 2021). On the other hand, if adult-like, we predicted that
identification of both structures would be linked to the difference in boundary cues
at the offset of Noun 1, i.e., the absence of boundary cues in compounds and the
presence in lists. These predictions were examined using an eye-tracking method to
monitor changes in looking behaviour across time as an indicator of online
processing of prosodic information. We further predicted that adults, and perhaps
children, might show differences in the time-course of identifying compounds vs.
lists, given the differences in processing these two types of prosody found by
McCauley et al. (2013). Eyetracking can thus serve as a more sensitive measure than
overt measures such as pointing tasks, providing more fine-grained information on
how prosodic information is processed in real time.
Method
Participants
Twenty monolingual Australian English-speaking (AusE) undergraduates (13F, 6M, 1
undisclosed) from the Sydney area formed the adult baseline for this experiment
(Mean age = 21 years). An additional 6 adults were excluded for inattentiveness/low
sampling rate (less than 50% samples, n = 3), or failure to calibrate (n = 3). All
participants provided consent and received course credit for participation in the study.
Twenty-eight monolingual AusE-speaking children (10M, 18F) participated in the
study (Mean age = 5;11 years, Range = 5;7-6;5). In Australia, children begin attending
the first year of primary school (year 1) between 5;6 and 6;6. This age range was
therefore chosen to ensure similar exposure to schooling within the sample. An
additional 7 children were excluded for inattentiveness/poor sampling (less than 50%
samples, n = 5), failure to calibrate (n = 1), or Autism Spectrum Disorder (n = 1). All
participants received a gift card for their participation.

Stimuli
Auditory stimuli
The stimuli were recorded in a child-friendly manner by a female native AusE-speaker
in an acoustically shielded recording booth, sampled at 48 kHz. The target test stimuli
were eight pairs of nouns used in both compounds and lists (see Table 1).
The targets were embedded in a carrier sentence: `I can see Noun1Noun2 and FILLER'
for the compound condition, and `I can see Noun1, Noun2 and FILLER' for the list
condition. To measure the acoustic properties of the stimuli (duration and pitch), each
sentence was acoustically coded for the onset and offset of Noun1, Noun2 and Pause
between the two nouns. This was to ensure that the acoustics of the stimuli were as
anticipated. The onset of each noun was identified by the emergence of voicing or
beginning of the release for stop consonants. The offset of each noun was identified by
the cessation of voicing or frication for fricative consonants. Pause duration was
measured from the offset of Noun1 to the onset of Noun2.
The average sentence duration was 2616 ms (range: 2280 to 3300ms) (see Table 2 for
acoustic measures of the stimuli). The mean pitch (f0) (as measured over the voiced
portion of each noun) was higher in Noun1 than Noun2 for the compounds
(Mnoun1 = 264Hz and Mnoun2 = 189Hz), but similar for both nouns in the lists
(Mnoun1 = 221Hz and Mnoun2 = 213Hz). No pause was found between Noun1 and
Noun2 in compounds (M = 33ms) but a pause was present in the lists (M = 213ms)

606

Nan Xu Rattanasone et al.

Table 1. Test stimuli
Compounds

Lists

icecream

ice, cream

icecubes

ice, cubes

goldfish

gold, fish

raincoats

rain, coats

jellybeans

jelly, beans

jellyfish

jelly, fish

waterguns

water, guns

waterslides

water, slides

Table 2. Acoustic Measures of the Stimuli
Duration (ms)

Pitch (Hz)

M

SD

M

SD

Noun1

344

81

264

9

Pause

33

32

Noun2

458

94

189

8

488

129

221

12

213

17

Compound

List
Noun1
Pause

213

69

Noun2

497

95

(see Campione and Veronis (2002) for a discussion on pauses, i.e., duration greater than
200ms, adopted as the criterion here). The average duration of Noun1 was shorter than
Noun2 in compounds (Mnoun1 = 344ms and Mnoun2 = 458ms) but more similar in
duration in the lists (Mnoun1 = 488ms and Mnoun2 = 497ms). These acoustic
differences in pitch and duration are consistent with those reported for native
speakers of Australian English (Yuen et al., 2021).
Visual stimuli
Clipart pictures depicting each target sentence were created with compound and list pairs
presented side-by-side, e.g., `jellybeans and chips' was paired with `jelly, beans and chips'
(see Figure 1). The image associated with each sentence consisted of 3 items, e.g., red
jellybeans, green jellybeans and a packet of chips for the compound condition, and red
jelly, green beans and a packet of chips for the list condition. This was to ensure that
the two pictures contained the same number of items and were roughly equal in
complexity. A total of eight pairs of stimuli were created. Two test versions were
constructed and pseudo-randomized so that no more than two trials from the same

Journal of Child Language

607

Figure 1. Sample trial with two pictures; left depicts `jellybeans and chips' and the competitor, right picture
depicts `jelly, beans, and chips'. Underlined parts of the auditory stimulus are considered as the post-naming
portion of the eye-tracking data (i.e., from the offset of the noun 1 in both the two-word compound and
three-word list conditions).

condition, e.g., two compounds or two list items, were presented sequentially. In each
version participants heard auditory stimuli for each pair of images only as compound
or list, never both for the same image. In each test version half of the images were
matched with compounds and the other half with lists. The match was reversed to
create a second test version. This ensured that each noun was heard only once, either
as part of a compound or list, thereby avoiding any confusion, learning effects or
predictability during the experiment. The sides (left or right) where the compound vs.
list images appeared were also counterbalanced across the two versions. Half the
participants received one version of the test and half received the other version.
All children included in the analysis could name all items presented. This was
assessed as part of a screener that was carried out after the test session to avoid
priming any prosodic cues.

Procedure
Each participant was invited into a test booth with a video feed into the control room.
This was done so that the experimenter could monitor the session and parents could see
their child from the control room. The participant was seated in front of a table with an
LG Flatron W2753VC widescreen 27-inch high definition monitor located
approximately 85cm in front of the participant. In front of the screen was a Tobii
Eye-tracker X120, tilted at a 30 angle and positioned 15cm below the monitor.
During the test session, participants were seated approximately 65cm in front of the
eye-tracker. The experiment was delivered using Tobii Studio (3.2.3). Each trial
consisted of two paired pictures, approximately 23.3cm by 27.7cm each. The auditory
stimuli were played at a conversation level ( 65 dBA) through two external speakers
on either side of the monitor.
Each session began with three orientation trials, designed to cue participants as to
how to perform the task. In these trials, two pictures depicting different clipart
animals were presented side-by-side on the screen (a bat and a bird, a dog and a cat,
and a cow and a duck). The children were invited to play a game where they needed
to look at the pictures on the computer. While viewing the images, participants
heard an auditory prompt, e.g., `I can see a bird', after which the target picture (e.g.,
bird) flashed, then both pictures disappeared.

608

Nan Xu Rattanasone et al.

The orientation trials were followed by four practice trials and eight test trials. Each
practice and test trial lasted approximately 9.5 seconds and began with a pair of
pictures. The practice trials helped children to generalise the looking response they had
practiced in the orientation trials to the test condition. These pictures remained
on-screen until the end of the trial. After the pictures had been displayed for 4
seconds, the auditory test sentence was played, e.g., `I can see jellybeans and chips'.
Participants were asked to look at the picture that corresponded to the auditory sentence.
Looking behaviour analysis
First, areas of interest (AOIs) were defined around the compound and list pictures for
each trial. Then looking behaviour in terms of fixations to the AOIs using the IVT
fixation filter were extracted from Tobii Studio (3.2.3). Participants with fewer than
50% of samples recorded across trials were excluded from further analysis to avoid
including data from those who were not paying attention or whose eyes could not be
consistently tracked.
Two types of analysis were then conducted on looking behaviour. The first examined
changes in the proportion of fixations to the target picture pre- and post-auditory
naming (proportion shift)1. The 4-second pre-naming analysis window began at the
onset of each trial and ended at the onset of the auditory stimulus. The 4-second
post-naming analysis window began at the offset of Noun1 in both the compound
and list conditions, e.g., from the offset of jelly in both `jellybeans and chips' and
`jelly, beans and chips'. This analysis window was selected because boundary cues are
expected to begin here for list forms, but not the compounds. Fixations were binned
across 200ms windows from the start of post-naming window to allow for the time
taken to plan eye-movements. The `proportion shift' measure takes participants'
looking behaviour during the pre-auditory period as a within-subject baseline to
estimate the amount of change in looking to the target during the post-naming
phase. This measure provides a gross indication of changes in looking behaviour
across trials and evaluates whether children and adults show similar levels of
comprehension of compounds versus lists in response to prosodic cues. Larger
positive shifts (> 0) in the proportions of fixations to the target picture suggest more
looks to the target post-naming and indicate correct identification of the target
structure (compound or list).
The second analysis involved fitting growth curves for each participant by condition.
This analysis was based on the proportion of fixations to the target over the 4-second
post naming window from the offset of Noun1 in 200ms bins for both conditions. A
Richards Curve (Richards, 1959) was used2. The parameters of the curve include
estimates for the lower and upper limits of the curve; the growth rate, indicating
1
Proportion shift is calculated by proportion of looks to the target picture post-naming minus
pre-naming with 200ms bins.


Target post
Target pre
Proportion Shift =
-
Target post + Distractor post
Target pre + Distractor pre


2
L
Richards Curve y = A +
is a five-parameter modified logistic curve where A is the
1
(1+Te-k(t-tm) )T
lower asymptote (determined by the proportion of fixations to target at offset of Noun1), L is the upper
asymptote, T is a fixed inflection point, e is the natural exponential function, k is growth rate, and tm is
time at maximum growth. Note L is determined by the maximum of the proportion of fixations to
target (a positive number) or away from the target (a negative number).

Journal of Child Language

609

Figure 2. Proportion shift in looking to target compared to chance (0 = no shift as shown with dashed line) by
Condition (Compounds and Lists) and Group (Adult and Child), with the standard error of the mean. **p < .001

steepness of the curve; and the time of maximum growth (inflection point), indicating
time where the proportion of looks are shifting most rapidly to the target. These
parameters describe a curve with an initial lag followed by a period of rapid growth
before it asymptotes. Unlike the logistic curve, where the curve is always
symmetrical, the Richards' Curve is more flexible in allowing for asymmetries around
the inflection point. The best-fitted curve was estimated using least squared
differences from the raw data. The fitted curves allow us to analyse looking changes
over time, but more importantly, it allows for direct comparison of processing time
(inflection point) between different conditions and groups. Shorter time to
maximum growth is used here as an indicator of faster processing.
Results
To investigate whether participants had more fixations to the target after hearing the
auditory stimulus, proportion shifts were compared to chance (no shift) for each
Condition (compounds and lists) and Group (adults and children) separately (see
Figure 2 for bar graph of results). Two sample unequal variance t-tests were
conducted for each group and condition. For adults, the proportion shift was
significantly above chance for both compounds (t (18) = 16.95, p < .001) and lists (t
(18) = 7.72, p < .001). However, for children, the proportion shift was only
significantly above chance for compounds (t (26) = 8.74, p < .001), not lists (t (26) =
0.55, p = .59). The same results remained after Bonferroni adjustments to alpha
(.006). This suggests that adults identified both compounds and lists, but that
children could only identify compounds based on prosodic cues.
To determine whether there were differences in processing time for the two
conditions across groups, growth-curve analyses were performed using the curve
parameter `Time at maximum growth' as a dependent variable and indicator of
processing time. This inflection point is a time when participants are beginning to
make more systematic looks to the target picture across trials, and is akin to reaching
a threshold point where they have accrued enough information to make a decision.
Longer time to arrive at maximum growth was used to indicate longer processing
time. A mixed design Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) was conducted with Condition

610

Nan Xu Rattanasone et al.

Figure 3. Raw proportion of looks to target (in 200ms bins) over time (with standard error) for compound and
list conditions with 0 set to the onset of Noun1 (where relevant acoustic cues becomes available), for adults and
children. Vertical lines indicate the time at maximum growth for compounds (solid line) and lists (dashed line).

as a within-subjects factor with 2 levels (Compounds and Lists) and Group as a
between-subjects factor with 2 levels (Adults and Children) (see Figure 3, note that
proportion of looks to target is around chance at the onset of Noun1 when the
acoustic cue has not yet been made available to the listeners). Six outlier trials with
z-scores larger than 2 were identified from the child group and were removed from
the analysis. The results showed only a significant main effect for Group (F(42, 1) =
21.54, p < .001, = .34). This suggests that adults had significantly faster overall
processing speed compared to children (M = 737ms vs. M = 1635ms, respectively) but
that the two groups did not perform differently across the two conditions.

Discussion
This study examined whether 5-6-year-olds can use prosodic cues to identify
compounds and lists. Given that children the same age can use prosodic cues for
these structures in PRODUCTION, the prediction was that children in the current study
would also be able to use these prosodic cues to identify compounds and lists in
COMPREHENSION. It was further predicted that, compared to adults, children might
show slower overall processing times or different patterns in processing, especially
if their productive use of boundary cues was not yet robust. Furthermore, we
considered that differences in the time-course of looks across the compound and list
conditions may differ within participant groups, as different mechanisms may be
involved in integrating prosodic information at the word vs. phrase level of linguistic
processing.
The results showed that, although adults could consistently identify both compounds
and lists, the children could only reliably identify compounds; performance for lists was
at chance. Therefore, prosodic cues associated with list forms do not result in more
looks to the target. This suggests that they are more aware of acoustic cues associated
with word-level prosody than those with phrase-level prosody. Taken together with
the recent production study (Yuen et al., 2021), these results show that children can

Journal of Child Language

611

and PERCEIVE prosodic cues at the word level but are not yet adult-like in their
use of prosodic cues at the phrase level.
In terms of the online processing of compounds vs. lists, the time at maximum
growth (inflection point) of the looking data showed that adults rapidly identified
compounds and lists at 795ms vs. 678ms respectively, after hearing Noun 1 in each
condition. This means that adult listeners identified COMPOUNDS and LISTS before the
end of Nouns 2 (inflection points for Compounds = 795ms & Lists = 678ms (see
Figure 3), end of noun 2 for Compounds = 835m & Lists = 1198ms (see Table 2)). In
both cases the estimated inflection point coincides with the time when
disambiguating prosodic boundary cues become available, showing that adults have
fine-grained sensitivity to both the absence and presence of relevant acoustic
information, using this to make their judgements. This suggests that adults can
rapidly make use of acoustic information for both types of structures without
incurring additional processing time.
Children, on the other hand, identify the compounds after the sentence ends,
suggesting much slower processing times, or perhaps even different processing
strategies compared to adults (Rigler, Farris-Trimble, Greiner, Walker, Tomblin &
McMurray, 2015). Children seemed to wait until well past the end of the sentence
before making any decisions, long after the relevant time window for prosodic
boundary cues had passed. This suggests that 5-6-year-olds might need much more
time to process both word and phrase level prosodic cues compared to adults. On
the other hand, children could not identify list forms even after all prosodic
information was made available. In compounds, word level prosodic acoustic cues
are based on the strong-weak stress pattern, and shorter duration of Noun 1 than
Noun 2 without pause; in lists, word stress patterns and pre-boundary lengthening of
each noun, plus a pause in between, are present. However, the additional stress,
durational cues and pauses did not help children identify the list forms. This
suggests that children have not yet acquired the mapping between these phrase-level
prosodic cues and their semantic import for signalling a list. This could also explain
the inconsistent use of pauses in children's productions to contrast compounds from
lists (Yuen et al., 2021). Thus, while children might be sensitive to these prosodic
cues, they still need to learn to associate these cues to different prosodic (and
semantic) domains. Our results thus suggest that while 5-6-year-olds can, albeit very
slowly, identify word level prosodic information (compounds), they are still not able
to identify phrase level prosody (lists). These findings are in line with past imaging
studies which suggest that, while children may be sensitive to prosodic cues, they are
not yet able to consistently evaluate and integrate this information online (Friedrich,
Alter & Kotz, 2001; McCauley et al., 2013). Future research could employ an overt
decision task to see if children show the same patterns of performance found here,
and/or if other factors, such as familiarity of the items or word/input frequency,
might affect children's performance.
These results suggest that young children's inability to use prosodic information
consistently is not due to a lexical bias, since our study and that of Yuen et al.
(2021) both used real words - in contrast to Vogel and Raimy's study (2002) using
non-words. Children at this age are beginning to use both word and phrase level
prosody to contrast known compounds from their list forms in their own
productions, albeit inconsistently (Yuen et al., 2021). The comprehension results
presented here provide further support for those findings, showing that 5-6-year-olds
cannot yet consistently use phrase level prosodic information in an online task to
PRODUCE

612

Nan Xu Rattanasone et al.

identify lists. Rather, the acquisition of phrase level prosody is more protracted than
word level prosody (see Demuth & McCullough, 2009; Demuth, 2018; Gerken, 2006
for similar proposals for younger children in other domains). One reason for this
might be that young children have not yet learned to weigh prosodic cues to word
vs. phrase structures in an adult-like fashion, raising questions about children's
attunement to prosodic information during language processing more generally.
Future studies could manipulate specific acoustic cues (e.g., pitch and duration)
independently to further examine the emerging awareness of how these cues map
onto different linguistics structures. It is possible that children rely on some cues
more than others, leading to poor performance on the present task. Future studies
could also explore the possibility that children have challenges integrating multiple
prosodic cues to word vs. phrase level information, as well as the acoustic realization
of compounds and lists in child- vs. adult-directed speech. This present study used
child-directed speech, an input register which children are familiar with, but which
might differ from adult-directed forms, e.g., slower speech rate and longer durations
for segments. A better understanding of how speech style registers affect the prosodic
realization of e.g., boundary cues could shed more light on cue weighting and cue
use in prosodic development.
These results also raise many questions, including when children's processing of
compounds and lists become more adult-like. Even less is known about how such
structures are acquired by child second language learners of English, especially for
native speakers of tone languages, where pitch and duration are used primarily to
signal word level information (see Nguyn & Ingram, 2007 for discussion of
compound-phrasal prosody in Vietnamese). There are also implications for children
with hearing loss, where pitch and duration information are transmitted differently
from that experienced by children with normal hearing (Kong, Deeks, Axon &
Carlyon, 2009; Macherey & Carlyon, 2014; Macherey, Deeks & Carlyon, 2011). A
better understanding of these issues will thus be of interest for a broad range of
researchers, educators and clinicians.
Conclusion
While English-speaking 5-6-year-olds can use appropriate word and phrase level
prosody in production, they are only able to identify word level (i.e., compound)
prosody confidently in comprehension, with the use of phrase level (i.e., list) prosody
remaining a challenge. This suggests that children may be able to produce phrase
level prosody before they can confidently use the same cues during language
processing/comprehension.
Acknowledgements. We thank Gretel MacDonald, Stefanie Shattuck-Hufnagel and members of the Child
Language Lab at Macquarie University for helpful comments and suggestions, and Peter Petocz for
statistical advice. Partial funding for this research was provided by the following grants: ARC FL
130100014 (Demuth) and ARC Centre of Excellence for Cognition and its Disorders CE110101021.

References
Becker, J. A. (1994). "Sneak-shoes", "sworders" and "nose-beards": a case study of lexical innovation. First
Language, 14(42-43), 195-211. https://doi.org/10.1177/014272379401404213
Campione, E., & Veronis, J. (2002). A large-scale multilingual study of silent pause duration. In Speech
prosody 2002, international conference.

Journal of Child Language

613

Chomsky, N., & Halle, M. (1968). The sound pattern of English.
Christophe, A., Dupoux, E., Bertoncini, J., & Mehler, J. (1994). Do infants perceive word boundaries? An
empirical study of the bootstrapping of lexical acquisition. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America, 95(3), 1570-1580.
Clark, E. V. (1981). Lexical innovations: How children learn to create new words. The Child's Construction
of Language, 299-328.
Clark, E. V., Gelman, S. A., & Lane, N. M. (1985). Compound Nouns and Category Structure in Young
Children. Child Development, 56(1), 84-94. https://doi.org/10.2307/1130176
Clark, E. V., Hecht, B. F., & Mulford, R. C. (1986). Coining complex compounds in English: Affixes and
word order in acquisition. Linguistics, 24(1), 7-29.
Cutler, A., & Butterfield, S. (1990). Durational cues to word boundaries in clear speech.
Demuth, K., & McCullough, E. (2009). The prosodic (re)organization of children's early English articles.
Journal of Child Language, 36(01), 173-200. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000908008921
Demuth, K. (2018). Prosodic constraints on children's use of grammatical morphemes. First Language,
0142723717751984. https://doi.org/10.1177/0142723717751984
Friedrich, C. K., Alter, K., & Kotz, S. A. (2001). An electrophysiological response to different pitch
contours in words. NeuroReport, 12, 3189-3191.
Gerken, L. (2006). Decisions, decisions: infant language learning when multiple generalizations are
possible. Cognition, 98(3), B67-B74. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2005.03.003
Hirose, Y., & Mazuka, R. (2015). Predictive processing of novel compounds: Evidence from Japanese.
Cognition, 136, 350-358.
Kong, Y.-Y., Deeks, J. M., Axon, P. R., & Carlyon, R. P. (2009). Limits of temporal pitch in cochlear
implants. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 125(3), 1649-1657. https://doi.org/10.1121/
1.3068457
Krott, A., & Nicoladis, E. (2005). Large constituent families help children parse compounds. Journal of
Child Language, 32(01), 139-158. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000904006622
Macherey, O., & Carlyon, R. P. (2014). Cochlear implants. Current Biology, 24(18), R878-R884. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.cub.2014.06.053
Macherey, O., Deeks, J. M., & Carlyon, R. P. (2011). Extending the Limits of Place and Temporal Pitch
Perception in Cochlear Implant Users. JARO: Journal of the Association for Research in Otolaryngology,
12(2), 233-251. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10162-010-0248-x
McCauley, S. M., Hestvik, A., & Vogel, I. (2013). Perception and bias in the processing of
compound versus phrasal stress: Evidence from event-related brain potentials. Language and speech,
56(1), 23-44.
Nguyn, A.-T. T., & Ingram, J. C. L. (2007). Acoustic and perceptual cues for compound-phrasal contrasts
in Vietnamese. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 122(3), 1746-1757. https://doi.org/10.
1121/1.2747169
Nicoladis, E. (2003). What compound nouns mean to preschool children. Brain and Language, 84(1), 38-
49. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0093-934X(02)00519-9
Richards, F. J. (1959). A flexible growth function for empirical use. Journal of experimental Botany, 10(2),
290-301.
Rigler, H., Farris-Trimble, A., Greiner, L., Walker, J., Tomblin, J. B., & McMurray, B. (2015). The slow
developmental time course of real-time spoken word recognition. Developmental psychology, 51(12),
1690.
Snow, D. (1994). Phrase-final syllable lengthening and intonation in early child speech. Journal of Speech &
Hearing Research, 37(4), 831. https://doi.org/Article
Vogel, I., & Raimy, E. (2002). The acquisition of compound vs. phrasal stress: the role of prosodic
constituents. Journal of Child Language, 29(02), 225-250. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000902005020
Wells, B., Peppe, S., & Goulandris, N. (2004). Intonation development from five to thirteen. Journal of
Child Language, 31(4), 749-778.
Wheeldon, L. R., & Lahiri, A. (2002). The minimal unit of phonological encoding: prosodic or lexical
word. Cognition, 85(2), B31-B41.
Wightman, C. W., Shattuck-Hufnagel, S., Ostendorf, M., & Price, P. J. (1992). Segmental durations in
the vicinity of prosodic phrase boundaries. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 91(3), 1707-
1717. https://doi.org/10.1121/1.402450

614

Nan Xu Rattanasone et al.

Wynne, H. S., Wheeldon, L., & Lahiri, A. (2018). Compounds, phrases and clitics in connected speech.
Journal of Memory and Language, 98, 45-58.
Yuen, I., Xu Rattanasone, N., Schmidt, E., McDonald, G., Holt, R., & Demuth, K. (2021). Five-year-olds
produce prosodic cues to distinguish compounds from lists in Australian English. Journal of Child
Language, 1-19.

Cite this article: Xu Rattanasone N, Yuen I, Holt R, Demuth K (2022). Jellybeans... or Jelly, Beans...? 5-6year-olds can identify the prosody of compounds but not lists. Journal of Child Language 49, 602-614.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000921000234

